Microarrays can measure the expression of thousands of genes to
identify changes in expression between different biological states.
Methods are needed to determine the significance of these changes
while accounting for the enormous number of genes. We describe a
method, Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM), that assigns a
score to each gene on the basis of change in gene expression relative
to the standard deviation of repeated measurements. For genes with
scores greater than an adjustable threshold, SAM uses permutations
of the repeated measurements to estimate the percentage of genes
identified by chance, the false discovery rate (FDR). When the transcriptional
response of human cells to ionizing radiation was measured
by microarrays, SAM identified 34 genes that changed at least
1.5-fold with an estimated FDR of 12%, compared with FDRs of 60 and
84% by using conventional methods of analysis. Of the 34 genes, 19
were involved in cell cycle regulation and 3 in apoptosis. Surprisingly,
four nucleotide excision repair genes were induced, suggesting that
this repair pathway for UV-damaged DNA might play a previously
unrecognized role in repairing DNA damaged by ionizing radiation.
DNA microarrays contain oligonucleotide or cDNA probes for
measuring the expression of thousands of genes in a single
hybridization experiment. Although massive amounts of data are
generated, methods are needed to determine whether changes in
gene expression are experimentally significant. Cluster analysis of
microarray data can find coherent patterns of gene expression (1)
but provides little information about statistical significance. Methods
based on conventional t tests provide the probability (P) that a
difference in gene expression occurred by chance (2, 3). Although
P 5 0.01 is significant in the context of experiments designed to
evaluate small numbers of genes, a microarray experiment for
10,000 genes would identify 100 genes by chance. This problem led
us to develop a statistical method adapted specifically for microarrays,
Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM).
SAM identifies genes with statistically significant changes in
expression by assimilating a set of gene-specific t tests. Each gene
is assigned a score on the basis of its change in gene expression
relative to the standard deviation of repeated measurements for
that gene. Genes with scores greater than a threshold are deemed
potentially significant. The percentage of such genes identified by
chance is the false discovery rate (FDR). To estimate the FDR,
nonsense genes are identified by analyzing permutations of the
measurements. The threshold can be adjusted to identify smaller or
larger sets of genes, and FDRs are calculated for each set. To
demonstrate its utility, SAM was used to analyze a biologically
important problem: the transcriptional response of lymphoblastoid
cells to ionizing radiation (IR).
Materials and Methods
Preparation of RNA. Human lymphoblastoid cell lines GM14660 and
GM08925 (Coriell Cell Repositories, Camden, NJ) were seeded at
2.5 3 105 cellsyml and exposed to IR 24 h later. RNA was isolated,
labeled, and hybridized to the HUGENEFL GENECHIP microarray
according to manufacturer’s protocols (Affymetrix, Santa
Clara, CA).
Microarray Hybridization. Each gene in the microarray was represented
by 20 oligonucleotide pairs, each pair consisting of an
oligonucleotide perfectly matched to the cDNA sequence, and a
second oligonucleotide containing a single base mismatch. Because
gene expression was computed from differences in hybridization to
the matched and mismatched probes, expression levels were sometimes
reported by the GENECHIP ANALYSIS SUITE software as
negative numbers.
Northern Blot Hybridization. Total RNA (15 mg) was resolved by
agarose gel electrophoresis, transferred to a nylon membrane, and
hybridized to specific radiolabeled DNA probes, which were prepared
by PCR amplification.
Results
RNA was harvested from wild-type human lymphoblastoid cell
lines, designated 1 and 2, growing in an unirradiated state (U) or
in an irradiated state (I) 4 h after exposure to a modest dose of 5
Gy of IR. RNA samples were labeled and divided into two identical
aliquots for independent hybridizations, A and B. Thus, data for
6,800 genes on the microarray were generated from eight hybridizations
(U1A, U1B, U2A, U2B, I1A, I1B, I2A, and I2B).
We scaled the data from different hybridizations as follows. A
reference data set was generated by averaging the expression of
each gene over all eight hybridizations. The data for each hybridization
were compared with the reference data set in a cube root
scatter plot. We chose the cube root scatter plot because it resolved
the vast majority of genes that are expressed at low levels and
permitted the inclusion of negative levels of expression that are
sometimes generated by the GENECHIP software. A linear leastsquares
fit to the cube root scatter plot was then used to calibrate
each hybridization.
After scaling, a linear scatter plot was generated for average gene
expression in the four A aliquots (U1A, I1A, U2A, and U2A) vs.
the average in the four B aliquots (U1B, I1B, U2B, and U2B), a
partitioning of the data that eliminates biological changes in gene
expression (Fig. 1A). The linear scatter plot confirmed that the data
were generally reproducible but failed to resolve genes expressed at
low levels. Better resolution of these genes was achieved by the cube
root scatter plot (Fig. 1B), which revealed three salient features: the
large percentage of genes (24%) assigned negative levels of expression,
the large percentage of genes with low levels of expression, and
the low signal-to-noise ratio at low levels of expression.
To assess the biological effect of IR, a scatter plot was generated
for average gene expression in the four irradiated states vs. the four
unirradiated states (compare Fig. 1 B and C). A few of the
potentially significant changes in gene expression are indicated by
arrows in Fig. 1C, but the effect was not easily quantified, and a
method was needed to identify changes with statistical confidence.
Abbreviations: SAM, significance analysis of microarrays; FDR, false discovery rate; IR,
ionizing radiation; FWER, family-wise error rate.
‡To whom reprint requests should be addressed. E-mail: chu@cmgm.stanford.edu.
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment. This
article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C.
§1734 solely to indicate this fact.
5116–5121 u PNAS u April 24, 2001 u vol. 98 u no. 9 www.pnas.orgycgiydoiy10.1073ypnas.091062498
Our approach was based on analysis of random fluctuations in
the data. In general, the signal-to-noise ratio decreased with
decreasing gene expression (Fig. 1). However, even for a given level
of expression, we found that fluctuations were gene specific. To
account for gene-specific fluctuations, we defined a statistic based
on the ratio of change in gene expression to standard deviation in
the data for that gene. The ‘‘relative difference’’ d(i) in gene
expression is:
d~i! 5 x#I~i! 2 x#U~i!
s~i! 1 s0
[1]
where x#I(i) and x#U(i) are defined as the average levels of
expression for gene (i) in states I and U, respectively. The
‘‘gene-specific scatter’’ s(i) is the standard deviation of repeated
expression measurements:
s~i! 5 ÎaHOm@xm~i! 2 x#I~i!#2 1 On@xn~i! 2 x#U~i!#2
J [2]
where Sm and Sn are summations of the expression measurements
in states I and U, respectively, a 5 (1yn1 1 1yn2)y
(n1 1 n2 2 2), and n1 and n2 are the numbers of measurements
in states I and U (four in this experiment).
To compare values of d(i) across all genes, the distribution of d(i)
should be independent of the level of gene expression. At low
expression levels, variance in d(i) can be high because of small
values of s(i). To ensure that the variance of d(i) is independent of
gene expression, we added a small positive constant s0 to the
denominator of Eq. 1. The coefficient of variation of d(i) was
computed as a function of s(i) in moving windows across the data.
The value fors0 was chosen to minimize the coefficient of variation.
For the data in this paper, this computation yielded s0 5 3.3.
Scatter plots of d(i) vs. s(i) are shown in Fig. 2. The scatter plot
for relative difference between states I and U is shown in Fig. 2A.
By contrast, the scatter plot for relative difference between cell lines
1 and 2 shows more marked changes in Fig. 2B. These relative
differences exceeded random fluctuations in the data, as measured
by the relative difference between hybridizations A and B in Fig. 2C.
Although the relative difference computed from hybridizations
A and B provided a control for random fluctuations, additional
controls were needed to assign statistical significance to the biological
effect of IR. Instead of performing more experiments, which
are expensive and labor intensive, we generated a large number of
controls by computing relative differences from permutations of
the hybridizations for the four irradiated and four unirradiated
states. To minimize potentially confounding effects from differences
between the two cell lines, we analyzed the data by using the
36 permutations that were balanced for cell lines 1 and 2. Permutations
were defined as balanced when each group of four experiments
contained two experiments from cell line 1 and two experiments
from cell line 2. Fig. 2 C and D are examples of balanced
permutations.
To find significant changes in gene expression, genes were ranked
by magnitude of their d(i) values, so that d(1) was the largest relative
difference, d(2) was the second largest relative difference, and d(i)
was the ith largest relative difference. For each of the 36 balanced
permutations, relative differences dp(i) were also calculated, and
the genes were again ranked such that dp(i) was the ith largest
relative difference for permutation p. The expected relative difference,
dE(i), was defined as the average over the 36 balanced
permutations, dE(i) 5 Spdp(i)y36.
To identify potentially significant changes in expression, we used
a scatter plot of the observed relative difference d(i) vs. the
expected relative difference dE(i) (Fig. 3A). For the vast majority of
genes, d(i) > dE(i), but some genes are represented by points
displaced from the d(i) 5 dE(i) line by a distance greater than a
threshold D. For example, the threshold D 5 1.2 illustrated by the
broken lines in Fig. 3A yielded 46 genes that were ‘‘called significant.’’
These 46 genes are shown in the context of the scatter plot
for d(i) vs. s(i) (Fig. 3B) and in the scatter plot for the cube root of
gene expression x#I(i) vs. x#U(i) (Fig. 3C). Genes identified by d(i) do
not necessarily have the largest changes in gene expression.
To determine the number of falsely significant genes generated
by SAM, horizontal cutoffs were defined as the smallest d(i) among
the genes called significantly induced and the least negative d(i)
among the genes called significantly repressed. The number of
falsely significant genes corresponding to each permutation was
computed by counting the number of genes that exceeded the
horizontal cutoffs for induced and repressed genes. The estimated
number of falsely significant genes was the average of the number
of genes called significant from all 36 permutations. For D 5 1.2,
the permuted data sets generated an average of 8.4 falsely significant
genes, compared with 46 genes called significant, yielding an
estimated FDR of 18% (Table 1). As D decreased, the number of
genes called significant by SAM increased but at the cost of an
Fig. 1. Gene expression measured by microarrays. (A) Linear scatter plot of gene expression. Each gene (i) in the microarray is represented by a point with coordinates
consisting of average gene expression measured from the four A hybridizations (avg xA) and the average gene expression in the four B hybridizations (avg xB). (B) Cube
root scatter plot of gene expression. The average gene expression from the A and B hybridizations have been plotted on a cube root scale to resolve genes expressed
at low levels. (C) Cube root scatter plot of average gene expression from the four hybridizations with uninduced cells (avg xU) and induced cells 4 h after exposure to
5 Gy of IR (avg xI). Some of the genes that responded to IR are indicated by arrows.
Tusher et al. PNAS u April 24, 2001 u vol. 98 u no. 9 u 5117
STATISTICS GENETICS
increasing FDR. (Omitting s0 from Eq. 1 produced higher FDRs of
45, 35, and 28% for D 5 0.6, 0.9, and 1.2.)
Our method for setting thresholds provides asymmetric cutoffs
for induced and repressed genes. The alternative is the standard
t test, which imposes a symmetric horizontal cutoff, with d(i) . c for
induced genes and d(i) ,2 c for repressed genes. However, the
asymmetric cutoff is preferred because it allows for the possibility
that d(i) for induced and repressed genes may behave differently in
some biological experiments.
SAM proved to be superior to conventional methods for analyzing
microarrays (Table 1 and Fig. 4A). First, SAM was compared
with the approach of identifying genes as significantly changed if an
R-fold change was observed. In this ‘‘fold change’’ method, r(i) 5
x#I(i)yx#U(i), and gene (i) was called significantly changed if r(i) . R
or r(i) , 1yR. To permit computation of r(i) from negative values
for gene expression, x#I(i) and x#U(i) were converted to 10 when their
values were negative or less than 10. The results of this procedure
yielded unacceptably high FDRs of 73–84%.
Another approach attempts to account for uncertainty in the
data by identifying genes as significantly changed if an R-fold
change is observed consistently between paired samples (4). To
apply this ‘‘pairwise fold change’’ method to our four data sets
before IR and four data sets after IR, changes in gene expression
were declared significant if 12 of 16 pairings satisfied the criteria
r(i) . R or r(i) , 1yR. Despite the demand for consistent changes
between paired samples, this method yielded FDRs of 60–71%.
To understand why fold-change methods fail, note that the vast
majority of genes are expressed at low levels where the signal-tonoise
ratio is very low (Fig. 3C). Thus, 2-fold changes in gene
expression occur at random for a large number of genes. Conversely,
for higher levels of expression, smaller changes in gene
expression may be real, but these changes are rejected by foldchange
methods. The pairwise fold-change method provides modest
improvement but remains inferior to SAM.
Of the 46 genes most highly ranked by SAM (D 5 1.2), 36
increased or decreased at least 1.5-fold (R 5 1.5). The number of
falsely significant genes that met these two criteria was 4.5, corresponding
to a FDR of 12% (Table 1). Fas was identified three times
as alternately spliced forms, leaving 34 independent genes (Table
2). As an indication of biological validity, 10 of the 34 genes have
been reported in the literature as part of the transcriptional
response to IR. TNF-a was reported to be induced by other
investigators (5) but was repressed here. Quantitative reverse
transcription–PCR confirmed this result.
Fig. 2. Scatter plots of relative difference in gene expression d(i) vs. genespecific
scatters(i). The data were partitioned to calculate d(i), as indicated by the
bar codes. The shaded and unshaded entries were used for the first and second
terms in the numerator of d(i) in Eq. 1. (A) Relative difference between irradiated
and unirradiated states. The statistic d(i) was computed from expression measurements
partitioned between irradiated and unirradiated cells. (B) Relative
difference between cell lines 1 and 2. The statistic d(i) was computed from
expression measurements partitioned between cell lines 1 and 2. (C) Relative
difference between hybridizations A and B. The statistic d(i) was computed from
the permutation in which the expression measurements were partitioned between
the equivalent hybridizations A and B. (D) Relative difference for a permutation
of the data that was balanced between cell lines 1 and 2.
Fig. 3. Identification of genes with significant changes in expression. (A) Scatter plot of the observed relative difference d(i) versus the expected relative difference
dE(i). The solid line indicates the line for d(i) 5 dE(i), where the observed relative difference is identical to the expected relative difference. The dotted lines are drawn
at a distance D 5 1.2 from the solid line. (B) Scatter plot of d(i) vs.s(i). (C) Cube root scatter plot of average gene expression in induced and uninduced cells. The cutoffs
for 2-fold induction and repression are indicated by the dashed lines. In A–C, the 46 potentially significant genes for D 5 1.2 are indicated by the squares.
5118 u www.pnas.orgycgiydoiy10.1073ypnas.091062498 Tusher et al.
To test the validity of SAM directly, we performed Northern
blots for genes that were randomly selected from the 46 and 57
genes most highly ranked by SAM (D 5 1.2) and the fold-change
method (at least 3.6-fold change), respectively. Northern blots
showed little correlation with the genes identified by the fold change
method (Fig. 4B), but strong correlation with the genes identified
by SAM (Fig. 4C). Indeed, Northern blots contradicted only 1
(maxiK) of 11 genes identified by SAM, consistent with our
estimated FDR.
Nineteen of the 34 genes most highly ranked by SAM appear to
be involved in the cell cycle. Three are known to be induced in a
p53-dependent manner: p21, cyclin G1, and mdm2 (6–8). Six cell
cycle genes were repressed: E2-EPF, p55cdc, cyclin B, ckshs2,
cdc25, and wee1 (9, 10). Five genes encoding the mitotic machinery
were also repressed: PLK-1, MKLP-1, MCAK, C-TAK1, CENP-E
(11–13). Three genes involved in cell proliferation were induced or
repressed: PTP(CAAX1), LPAP, and c-myc (14–18). Some responses
appeared paradoxical. For example, cdc25 phosphatase
and wee1 kinase have antagonistic effects on the phosphorylation
state of cdc2, but both genes were repressed. Repression of these
genes together with the mitotic genes may represent a damage
response that dismantles the cell cycle machinery until the cell has
repaired the damaged DNA.
Four of the 34 genes play roles in DNA repair, but none are
involved in the repair of IR-induced double-strand breaks. Instead,
the genes (p48, XPC, gadd45, PCNA) have roles in nucleotide
excision repair, a pathway conventionally associated with UVinduced
damage (19–22). We confirmed the induction of these
genes by Northern blot (23–25). Fornace et al. reported defective
removal of base damage induced by IR in xeroderma pigmentosum
cells (26). Leadon et al. reported that a novel DNA repair pathway
involving long excision repair patches of at least 150 nucleotides is
activated by IR but not UV (27). Our results suggest that this novel
pathway might include p48, XPC, gadd45, and PCNA.
Four of the 34 genes play roles in apoptosis (Fas, bbc3, TNF-a,
OX40 ligand). The remaining genes may have previously unsuspected
roles in the DNA damage response or may be among the
estimated set of four falsely detected genes.
The 34 genes most highly ranked by SAM are only a subset of all
of the genes that change 1.5-fold with IR. Indeed, we calculated the
difference between the number of genes called significant and the
number of falsely significant genes for decreasing D 5 0.3, 0.2, and
0.1, and found the differences to be 92, 170, and 184, respectively.
Thus, SAM suggests that approximately 180 of the 6,800 genes on
the microarray were induced or repressed by 5 Gy IR.
Discussion
SAM is a method for identifying genes on a microarray with
statistically significant changes in expression, developed in the
Fig. 4. Comparison of SAM to conventional methods for analyzing microarrays. (A) Falsely significant genes plotted against number of genes called significant. Of
the 57 genes most highly ranked by the fold change method, 5 were included among the 46 genes most highly ranked by SAM. Of the 38 genes most highly ranked
by the pairwise fold change method, 11 were included among the 46 genes most highly ranked by SAM. These results were consistent with the FDR of SAM compared
to the FDRs of the fold change and pairwise fold change methods. (B) Northern blot validation for genes identified by the fold change method. Values ofr(i) are plotted
for genes chosen at random from the 57 genes most highly ranked by the fold change method. (C) Validation for genes identified by SAM. Results are plotted for genes
chosen at random from the 46 genes most highly ranked by SAM. Genes analyzed by Northern blot are represented by circles. TNF-a was validated by using a
PreDeveloped TaqMan assay (PE Biosystems) and is represented by a square. The straight lines in B and C indicate the position of exact agreement between Northern
blot and microarray results.
Table 1. Comparison of methods for identifying changes in
gene expression
Parameter
Number falsely
significant
Number called
significant FDR
SAM
D 5 0.4 134.9 288 47%
D 5 0.5 78.1 192 41%
D 5 0.6 56.1 162 35%
D 5 0.9 19.1 80 24%
D 5 1.2 8.4 46 18%
D 5 1.2; R 5 1.5 4.5 34 12%
Fold change
R 5 2.0 283.1 348 81%
R 5 2.5 137.8 169 82%
R 5 3.0 76.8 99 78%
R 5 3.5 46.7 64 73%
R 5 4.0 29.3 35 84%
Pairwise fold change
R 5 1.2 245.6 355 69%
R 5 1.3 155.4 220 71%
R 5 1.5 76.2 118 65%
R 5 1.7 44.8 70 64%
R 5 2.0 22.8 38 60%
To increase the stringency for calling significant changes in gene expression,
parameters for each method (Dand R) were increased, as described in the
text. The false discovery rate (FDR) was defined as the percentage of falsely
significant genes compared to the genes called significant.
Tusher et al. PNAS u April 24, 2001 u vol. 98 u no. 9 u 5119
STATISTICS GENETICS
context of an actual biological experiment. SAM was successful
in analyzing this experiment as well as several other experiments
with oligonucleotide and cDNA microarrays (data not shown).
In the statistics of multiple testing (28–30), the family-wise error
rate (FWER) is the probability of at least one false positive over the
collection of tests. The Bonferroni method, the most basic method
for bounding the FWER, assumes independence of the different
tests. An acceptable FWER could be achieved for our microarray
data only if the corresponding threshold was set so high that no
genes were identified. The step-down correction method of Westfall
and Young (29), adapted for microarrays by Dudoit et al. (http:yy
www.stat.berkeley.eduyusersyterryyzarrayyHtmlymatt.html), allows
for dependent tests but still remains too stringent, yielding no
genes from our data.
Westfall and Young (29) define ‘‘weak control’’ to be control of
the FWER when all of the null hypotheses are true (i.e., when there
are no changes in gene expression). ‘‘Strong control’’ is control of
the FWER when any subset of the null hypotheses is true. Under
certain conditions, weak control implies strong control. In fact, the
step-down correction method exerts both weak and strong control.
The method of Benjamini and Hochberg (31) assumes independent
tests and guarantees an upper bound for the FDR (with
both weak and strong control) by a step-up or step-down
procedure applied to the individual P values. For our data, the
P value for each gene is calculated from permutations of the
eight experiments. Because of the limited number of permutations,
the FDR is too ‘‘granular’’, and we identified either zero
or 300 significant genes, depending on how the P value was
defined. A similar granular result was obtained for the adaptation
to dependent tests by Benjamini et al. [The Control of the
False Discovery Rate in Multiple Testing Under Dependency (Department
of Statistics and Operations Research, Tel Aviv University,
Tel Aviv). http:yywww.math.tau.ac.ily;ybenjay].
Table 2. Genes with changes in expression called significant by SAM
Rank Accession d(i) r(i) s(i) x#U(i) x#I(i) Gene*
*Gene functions: Black 5 cell cycle; Dark gray 5 apoptosis; Light gray 5 DNA repair. †Genes previously reported to respond transcriptionally to IR.
‡To compute r(i) 5 x#I(i)yx#U(i), negative levels of expression were reset to a value of 10.
5120 u www.pnas.orgycgiydoiy10.1073ypnas.091062498 Tusher et al.
SAM does not have strong or weak control of the FWER.
Instead, SAM provides an estimate of the FDR for each value of
the tuning parameter D. The estimated FDR is computed from
permutations of the data and hence assumes that all null hypotheses
are true, allowing for the possibility of dependent tests. It seems
plausible that this estimated FDR approximates the strongly controlled
FDR when any subset of null hypotheses is true. However,
we have not proven this in general. It is possible for SAM to give
an estimate of the FDR that is greater than 1. However, this has not
occurred in our experience. Indeed, SAM provides a reasonably
accurate estimate for the true FDR. To confirm this, we constructed
artificial data sets in which a subset of genes was induced
over a background of noise. SAM successfully identified the
induced genes and estimated the FDR with reasonable accuracy.
Although this paper analyzes a simple two-state experiment,
SAM can be generalized to other types of experiments by defining
d(i) in a different way. Suppose the data includes gene expression
xj(i) and a response parameter yj, in which i 5 1, 2, . . . , m genes,
j 5 1, 2, . . . , n states. The generalized statistical parameter still takes
the form d(i) 5 r(i)y[s(i) 1 s0], except that the definitions of r(i) and
s(i) change.
To identify genes with changes in expression in an experiment
with three or more states, the parameter d(i) is defined in terms of
the Fisher’s linear discriminant. One goal might be to identify genes
whose expression in one type of tumor is different from its
expression in other types of tumors. Suppose that a set of n samples
consists of K nonoverlapping subsets, such that the response
parameter yj e {1, . . . , K}. Define C(k) 5 { j : yj 5 k}. Let nk 5
number of observations in C(k). The average gene expression in
each subset is x#k(i) 5 Sj[C(k)xj(i)ynk and the average gene expression
for all n samples is x#(i) 5 Sjxj(i)yn. Then define:
r~i! 5 $@SknkyPknk#Sknk@x# k~i! 2 x#~i!#2
%
1/2 [3]
s~i! 5 $@Sk~1ynk!ySk~nk 2 1!#SkSj [C~k!@xj~i! 2 x# k~i!#2
%
1/2
[4]
SAM can be adapted for still other types of experimental data.
For example, to identify genes whose expression correlates with
survival time, d(i) is defined in terms of Cox’s proportional
hazards function, in which some of the patients remain alive or
are lost to follow-up at the time of the study. To identify genes
whose expression correlates with a quantitative parameter, such
as tumor stage, d(i) can be defined in terms of the Pearson
correlation coefficient. Another example includes the definition
of d(i) for paired data, such as gene expression in tumors before
and after chemotherapy. In each case, the FDR is estimated by
random permutation of the data for gene expression among the
different experimental arms, i.e., permutations among the n
arms of yj. Thus, SAM is a robust and straightforward method
that can be adapted to a broad range of experimental situations.
SAM and the adaptations discussed above are available for use
at http:yywww-stat-class.stanford.eduySAMySAMServlet.
We thank Peter Jackson, Ron Davis, James Ferrell, Dean Felsher, Lisa
DeFazio, Joe Budman, Jean Tang, Tom Tan, and Kerri Rieger for
helpful discussions. This work was supported by the Burroughs Wellcome
Clinical Scientist Award and by National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Grant CA77302 to G.C., by NIH Small Business Technology
Transfer grant CA75675 to G.C. and Affymetrix, and by the Stanford
Genome Training Grant to V.T.