ABSTRACT A method has been devised for the electrophoretic
transfer of proteins from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose
sheets. The method results in quantitative transfer
of ribosomal proteins from gels containing urea. For sodium
dodecyl sulfate gels, the original band pattern was obtained
with no loss of resolution, but the transfer was not quantitative.
The method allows detection of proteins by autoradiography
and is simpler than conventional procedures. The immobilized
proteins were detectable by immunological procedures. All
additional binding capacity on the nitrocellulose was blocked
with excess protein; then a specific antibody was bound and,
finally, a second antibody directed against the first antibody.
The second antibody was either radioactively labeled or conjugated
to fluorescein or to peroxidase. The specific protein was
then detected by either autoradiography, under UV light, or by
the peroxidase reaction product, respectively. In the latter case,
as little as 100 pg of protein was clearly detectable. It is anticipated
that the procedure will be applicable to analysis of a wide
variety of proteins with specific reactions or ligands.
Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis has become a standard tool
in every laboratory in which proteins are analyzed and purified.
Most frequently, the amount and location of the protein are of
interest and staining is then sufficient. However, it may also be
important to correlate an activity of a protein with a particular
band on the gel. Enzymatic and binding activities can sometimes
be detected in situ by letting substrates or ligands diffuse
into the gel (1, 2). In immunoelectrophoresis, the antigen is
allowed to diffuse (3) or electrophoretically move (4) against
antibody. A precipitate is then formed where the antigen and
antibody interact. Modifications have been described in which
the antigen is precipitated by directly soaking the separation
matrix in antiserum (5, 6). The range of gel electrophoretic
separation systems is limited by the pore size of the gels and
diffusion of the antibody. The systems are also dependent on
concentration and type of antigen or antibody to give a physically
immobile aggregate.
Analysis of cloned DNA has been revolutionized (7) by the
ability to fractionate the DNA electrophoretically in polyacrylamide/agarose
gels first and then to obtain a faithful replica
of the original gel pattern by blotting the DNA onto a sheet of
nitrocellulose on which it is immobilized. The immobilized
DNA can then be analyzed by in situ hybridization. The power
of immobilized two-dimensional arrays has been extended to
the analysis of proteins by use of antibody-coated plastic sheets
to pick up the corresponding antigen from colonies on agar
plates (8). Sharon et al. (9) have used antigen-coated nitrocellulose
sheets to pick up antibodies secreted by hybridoma clones
growing in agar.
In this report we describe a procedure for the transfer of
proteins from a polyacrylamide gel to a sheet of nitrocellulose
in such a way that a faithful replica of the original gel pattern
is obtained. A wide variety of analytical procedures can be
applied to the immobilized protein. Thus, the extreme versatility
of nitrocellulose binding assays can be combined with
high-resolution polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The procedure
brings to the analysis of proteins the power that the
Southern (7) technique has brought to the analysis of DNA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Immunogens and Immunization Procedures. Escherichia
coli ribosomal proteins L7 and L12 were extracted (10) from
50S subunits and purified as described (11) by ion-exchange
chromatography on carboxymethyl- and DEAE-cellulose.
Antibodies were raised in a goat by injecting 250 jig of protein
emulsified with complete Freund's adjuvant intracutaneously
distributed over several sites. Bacillus pertussis vaccine (1.5 ml
of Bordet-Gengou vaccine, Schweizerisches Serum- und
Impfinstitut, Bern, Switzerland) was given subcutaneously with
every antigen injection. Booster injections of the same formulation
were given on days 38, 79, and 110. The animal was bled
on day 117.
Subunits from chicken liver ribosomes (12) were combined
in equimolar amounts, and 200-iAg aliquots were emulsified
with 125 Al of complete Freund's adjuvant injected at one intraperitoneal
and four subcutaneous sites into BALB/c mice.
Booster injections of 400 ,ig of ribosomes in saline were given
intraperitoneally on days 33, 57, 58, and 59. The animals were
bled on day 71.
Electrophoretic Blotting Procedures. Proteins were first
subjected to electrophoresis in the presence of urea either in two
dimensions (12) or in one-dimensional slab gels corresponding
to the second dimension of the same two-dimensional system.
The proteins were then transferred to nitrocellulose sheets as
follows. The physical assembly used is shown diagrammatically
in Fig. 1. A sheet of nitrocellulose (0.45 ,im pore size in roll
form, Millipore) was briefly wetted with water and laid on a
scouring pad (Scotch-Brite) which was supported by a stiff
plastic grid (disposable micropipette tray, Medical Laboratory
Automation, Inc., New York). The gel to be blotted was put on
the nitrocellulose sheet and care was taken to remove all air
bubbles. A second pad and plastic grid were added and rubber
bands were strung around all layers. The gel was thus firmly
and evenly pressed against the nitrocellulose sheet. The assembly
was put into an electrophoretic destaining chamber with
the nitrocellulose sheet facing the cathode. The chamber contained
0.7% acetic acid. A voltage gradient of 6 V/cm was applied
for 1 hr.
For polyacrylamide electrophoresis in the presence of sodium
dodecyl sulfate (13) instead of urea, the procedure was as det
To whom reprint requests should be addressed.
4350
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page
charge payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement"
in accordance with 18 U. S. C. §1734 solely to indicate
this fact.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76 (1979) 4351
1
~~~~+
2
0 3 -"A0
0 r
1~~~
0
1 0
0 1
0
0 *I* I
A I 0
F/
6
FIG. 1. Assembly for electrophoretic blotting procedure. 1,
Electrodes of destainer; 2, elastic bands; 3, disposable pipette-tip tray;
4, nitrocellulose sheets; 5, polyacrylamide gel; 6, Scotch-Brite pads.
Assembly parts are shown separated for visualization only.
scribed above except that the polarity of the electrodes was
reversed and the electrode buffer was 25 mM Tris-192 mM
glycine/20% (vol/vol) methanol at pH 8.3.
Staining for Protein. The blot may be stained with amido
black (0.1% in 45% methanol/10% acetic acid) and destained
with 90% methanol/2% acetic acid (see ref. 14).
Immunological Detection of Proteins on Nitrocellulose.
The electrophoretic blots (usually not stained with amido black)
were soaked in 3% bovine serum albumin in saline (0.9%
NaCl/10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) for 1 hr at 40'C to saturate
additional protein binding sites. They were rinsed in saline and
incubated with antiserum appropriately diluted into 3% bovine
serum albumin in saline also containing carrier serum with
concentration and species as indicated in the legends. The sheets
were washed in saline (about five changes during 30 min, total)
and incubated with the second (indicator) antibody directed
against the immunoglobulins of the first antiserum. As indicator
antibodies we used '25I-labeled sheep anti-mouse IgG. This had
been purified with affinity chromatography on Sepharoseimmobilized
myeloma proteins and labeled by a modified
version of the chloramine T method in 0.5 ml with 0.5 mg of
IgG and 1 mCi of Na'25I (1 Ci = 3.7 X 1010 becquerels) for 60
sec at room temperature. The specific activity was approximately
1.5 yCi/Ag of IgG. 125I-Labeled IgG was diluted to 106
cpm/ml in saline containing 3% bovine serum albumin and 10%
goat serum, and 3 ml of this solution was used for a nitrocellulose
sheet of 100 cm2. Incubation was in the presence of 0.01% NaN3
for 6 hr at room temperature. The electrophoretic blots were
washed in saline (five changes during 30 min, total) and thoroughly
dried with a hair dryer. The blots were exposed to Kodak
X-Omat R film for 6 days.
Fluorescein- and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated rabbit
anti-goat IgG (Nordic Laboratories, Tilburg, Netherlands) were
reconstituted before use according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Fluorescein-conjugated antibodies were used at 1:50
dilution in saline containing 3% bovine serum albumin and 10%
rabbit serum. After incubation for 30 min at room temperature,
the blots were washed as above and inspected or photographed
with a Polaroid camera under long-wave UV light through a
yellow filter.
Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated IgG preparations were
used at 1:2000 dilution in saline containing 3% bovine serum
albumin and 10% rabbit serum. The blots were incubated for
2 hr at room temperature and washed as described above. For
the color reaction (15), the blots were soaked in a solution of 25
,.g of o-dianisidine per ml/0.01% H202/10 mM Tris-HCI, pH
7.4. This was prepared freshly from stock solutions of 1% odianisidine
(Fluka) in methanol and 0.30% H202. The reaction
was terminated after 20-30 min by washing with water. The
blots were dried between filter paper. Drying considerably
reduced the background staining. The blots were stored protected
from light.
RESULTS
Electrophoretic Transfer of Ribosomal Proteins from
Polyacrylamide Gels to Nitrocellulose Sheets. Most proteins
or complexes containing protein adsorb readily to nitrocellulose
filters (16), whereas salts, many small molecules, and RNA are
usually not retained. These binding properties are widely used
for binding assays with nitrocellulose filters. We found that
proteins were retained on these filters equally well when carried
towards the filter in an electric field. If the electric field was
perpendicular to a slab gel containing separated proteins (see
Fig. 1), we obtained a replica of the protein pattern on the nitrocellulose
sheet. This is demonstrated with ribosomal proteins
from E. coli; a conventionally stained gel (Fig. 2A) and a stained
electrophoretic blot of an identical gel (Fig. 2B) are shown. All
ribosomal proteins from chicken liver and E. coli ribosomes
detectable on two-dimensional gels could be seen on the electrophoretic
blots produced from them. An example of a blot
from a two-dimensional gel is given in Fig. 3. When the original
polyacrylamide gel was stained after blotting, no protein could
be detected. Thus, the blotting procedure removed all protein
from the gel.
To establish whether the proteins removed from the gels were
quantitatively deposited on the nitrocellulose sheet, we separated
3H-labeled proteins from chicken liver 60S ribosomal
subunit by two-dimensional electrophoresis and compared the
radioactivity that could be recovered from the blot with that
recovered directly from the gel (Table 1). Single proteins or
groups of poorly separated proteins were cut out and radioactivity
was measured after combustion of the samples. The results
were within the variability inherent to two-dimensional analyses.
Variations could be accounted for by variable transfer of
proteins into the second dimension gel and the acuity with
which spots can be cut out.
At loads exceeding the capacity of nitrocellulose, losses of
protein occurred. Titration with radioactive ribosomal proteins
under blotting conditions showed that at concentrations below
0.15 ,Lg/mm2 all protein was adsorbed. Overloading became
apparent when a second sheet of nitrocellulose directly underneath
the first one took up protein or when protein became
visible on the cathodal surface of amido black-stained blots.
The conservation of resolution together with the high recovery
of ribosomal proteins simplifies the procedure for autoradiography.
The common procedure involving drying of
polyacrylamide gels under heat and reduced pressure (19),
which is tedious and time consuming, may be eliminated. Because
the proteins become concentrated on a very thin layer,
autoradiography from 14C- and m5S-labeled proteins should be
highly efficient even without 2,5-diphenyloxazole impregnation
Biochemistry: Towbin et al.
4352 Biochemistry: Towbin et al.
A
Proc. Nati. Acad. Sci. USA 76 (1979)
B
I~~~~~~~
Fic.. Electrophoretic blotting of ribosomal proteins from one-dimensional gels. Total ribosomal proteins from E. coli were separated on
an 18% polyacrylamide slab gel containing 8 M urea. (A) A section of the gel was stained with Coomassie blue; (B) another section was electrop)horetically
blotted and the blot was stained as described in Materials and Methods. Electrophoresis was from left to right.
(19). We have successfully obtained such autoradiograms from
gels of MS-labeled proteins (not shown). Further, preliminary
experiments with tritiated proteins have shown that dried blots
may be processed for fluorography by brief soaking in 10%
diphenyloxazole in ether (20).
The above experiments were done with ribosomal proteins
separated on polyacrylamide gels containing urea. We have
electrophoretically blotted proteins from sodium dodecyl sulfate
by the modified procedure also described in Materials and
Methods. Again, there was no loss of resolution. However,
differences of staining intensities between proteins on the gel
A
fts
A.
FIG. 3. Electrophoretic blotting of ribosomal proteins from
two-dimensional gels. Proteins (35 ,ug) extracted from the 60S ribosomal
subunit of chicken liver (12) were separated by two-dimensional
gel electrophoresis. (A) Gel stained with Coomassie blue; (B) blot of
an identical gel. Electrophoresis: 1st dimension, from left to right
(towards cathode); 2nd dimension, top to bottom.
and the blot were apparent. In spite of the apparently incomplete
recovery, blots from polyacrylamide gels containing sodium
dodecyl sulfate may be used for detection of antigen in
the same way as described below for ribosomal proteins (unpublished
experiments).
Detection of Antigen by Antibody Binding on Blots In
Situ. We found that proteins transferred to nitrocellulose sheets
remained there without being exchanged over several days.
Because a blot could be saturated with bovine serum albumin
to block the residual binding capacity of the sheet, it can be
treated as a solid-phase immunoassay. In the following immunological
applications, we used indirect techniques
throughout. Thus, antibody bound by the immobilized antigen
was detected by a second, labeled antibody directed against the
first antibody, and in each case excess unbound antibody was
washed out.
Table 1. Efficiency of transfer of ribosomal proteins to
nitrocellulose sheets
Protein or
group of
proteins
analyzed
Recovery on
blot, %
3 123
4,4A 104
5 111
6 107
7,8 86
9 80
10 112
11 79
12, 16 93
13 95
15, 15A, 18 125
17 115
19 139
21,23 118
26 114
27 143
28, 29 69
31 117
33 131
Ribosomal large-subunit proteins from chicken liver were tritiated
by reductive methylation (17) and separated by two-dimensional
electrophoresis (12) in the presence of 35 ,ig of carrier protein. Two
identical gels were run. One was stained; the other was electrophoretically
blotted on a nitrocellulose sheet. Spots were identified according
to our nomenclature for chicken ribosomes (12), which differs
only in minor respects from that established for rat ribosomes (18).
Corresponding spots or groups of spots were cut from the gel and the
blot. Their radioactivity was determined after conversion to tritiated
water in a sample oxidizer (Oxymat).
BProc.Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76 (1979) 4353
A
FIG. 4. Detection of E. coli ribosomal proteins L7 and L12 by (A) horseradish peroxidase- and (B) fluorescein-conjugated antibodies. Total
ribosomal proteins from E. coli were separated and blotted as in Fig. 2. The anti-L7/L12 serum had a titer of 340 pmol of 70S ribosomes per
ml of serum as determined by turbidity formation (20). Incubation was for 2 hr at room temperature in goat antiserum diluted 1:10 in saline
containing 3% bovine serum albumin and 10%o rabbit carrier serum and then with conjugated anti-goat IgG. In each case the lower strip is a control
with preimmune antiserum. Electrophoresis was from left to right.
In Fig. 4 the detection of E. coli ribosomal proteins L7 and
L12 with a goat serum specific for proteins L7 and L12 is
shown. L7 is identical to L12, except for its N-acetylated
NH2-terminal amino acid (21). L7 and L12 fully crossreact
immunologically (22) and are separated on acidic polyacrylamide
gels (21). Both peroxidase- (Fig. 4A) and fluoresceinconjugated
(Fig. 4B) antibodies were able to reveal immunoglobulin
that was specifically retained by proteins L7 and L12.
In each case, the lower gel is a control with preimmune serum.
Peroxidase-conjugated antibodies were far more sensitive than
fluorescein-conjugated ones. They could therefore be used at
much higher dilution. This also permitted the detection of very
small amounts of antigen. With a rabbit serum (23) we could
detect 100 pg of L7 and L12 with serum and incubation conditions
similar to those of the experiment described in Fig. 4 (not
shown).
Because we can use the procedure to detect a specific antibody
reacting with a specific protein after electrophoresis in
polacrylamide, we should also be able to determine which
proteins have elicited antibodies in a complex mixture of immunogens.
In the experiment of Fig. 5, individual sera of five
mice immunized with chicken liver ribosomes were tested. We
used 125I-labeled sheep anti-mouse immunoglobulins to detect
the presence of mouse immunoglobulins. In all mice, antibodies
were preferentially produced against slowly moving proteins,
presumably of high molecular weight. The procedure can thus
characterize the antigen population against which specific
antibodies have been raised in a mixture of immunogens.
DISCUSSION
The electrophoretic blotting technique described here produces
replicas of proteins separated on polyacrylamide gels with high
fidelity. We obtained quantitative transfer with proteins from
gels containing urea. This was established here with ribosomal
proteins. More generally, nitrocellulose membranes have been
used to retain proteins from dilute solutions for their subsequent
quantitative determination (16). Still, there remains the possibility
that certain classes of protein do not bind to nitrocellulose.
In this case absorbent sheets other than nitrocellulose or different
blotting conditions may be helpful.
We have demonstrated that proteins immobilized on nitrocellulose
sheets can be used to detect their respective antibodies.
FIG. 5. Detection of immunoglobulin from individual mice directed against ribosomal proteins from chicken liver. Total protein from chicken
liver ribosomes (12) was electrophoretically separated and blotted as in Fig. 2. Sera were obtained from five individual mice immunized against
combined 40S and 60S subunits. The antisera were diluted 1:50 in saline containing 3% bovine serum albumin and 10% goat carrier serum. The
l)lots were incubated in 250 ,l of the diluted antiserum for 6 hr at room temperature. The blots were combined and treated with 125I-labeled
sheep anti-mouse IgG and autoradiographed. Electrophoresis was from left to right.
Biochemistry: Tow.in et al.
4354 Biochemistry: Towbin et al.
With radioactively labeled or peroxidase-conjugated antibodies
the method is sensitive enough to detect small amounts of
electrophoretically separated antigen, and this simple procedure
can also be used to show the presence of small amounts of
antibody in a serum of low titer. Because the antigen is immobilized
on a sheet, the antibody is not required to form a precipitate
with the antigen. The blotting technique therefore has
the potential for immunoelectrophoretic analysis of proteins
by using binding of Fab fragments or binding of antibodies
against a single determinant, such as monoclonal antibodies
produced by hybridomas (24). This could not be done by current
immunoelectrophoretic techniques. If hybridoma clones
are obtained from a mouse immunized with impure immunogen,
it will be possible to use the technique to screen for clones
making antibody directed against a desired antigen. Provided
the desired antigen has a characteristic mobility in polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis, the appropriate clone can be selected
without ever having pure antigen.
The procedure described here also has potential as a tool for
screening pathological sera containing auto-antibodies-e.g.,
those against ribosomes (25-27). The precise identification of
the immunogenic components may be a useful diagnostic tool
for various pathological conditions.
A further advantage of immobilization of proteins on nitrocellulose
is the ease of processing for autoradiography. Conventional
staining, destaining, and drying of polyacrylamide
gels takes many hours, and the exact drying conditions are extremely
critical, especially for 18% gels as used in the second
dimension for ribosomal proteins (12). When the proteins are
transferred to a nitrocellulose support, as described here, the
electrophoretic blotting takes 1 hr, staining and destaining less
than 10 min, and drying an additional 5 min. This is thus both
faster and simpler than conventional procedures, and it eliminates
the tedious and hazardous procedure of soaking the gels
in diphenyloxazole (19).
The technique has been developed to detect specific antisera
against ribosomal proteins. However, it is applicable to any
analytical procedure depending on formation of a proteinligand
complex. With the blotting technique, the usual procedure
of forming a complex in solution and retaining it on a
membrane would have to be reversed: the protein, already
adsorbed to the membrane, would have to retain the ligand
from a solution into which the membrane is immersed. Interactions
that can possibly be analyzed in this way include hormone-receptor,
cyclic AMP-receptor, and protein-nucleic acid
interactions. The ligand may also be a protein. Enzymes separated
on polyacrylamide gels could also be conveniently localized
on blots by in situ assays. A critical requirement for
these applications is that the protein is not damaged by the
adsorption process and that binding sites remain accessible to
ligands and substrates. In this respect, considerations similar
to those in affinity chromatography and insoluble enzyme
techniques pertain.
The method could also be adapted to the procedure of
Cleveland et al. (28) for the analysis of proteins eluted from
bands in polyacrylamide gels by one-dimensional fingerprints:
one could label by iodination in situ' on the nitrocellulose and
then carry out the proteolytic digestion.
In preliminary experiments we have attempted to identify
ribosomal RNA binding proteins by binding RNA to ribosomal
proteins immobilized on nitrocellulose by the procedure of this
paper, followed by staining for RNA (unpublished data), and
have found a tendency for nonspecific binding. However, J.
Steinberg, H. Weintraub, and U. K. Laemmli (personal communication)
have independently developed a similar procedure
for identifying DNA binding proteins.