RUBY came in the front door of the apartment building and lowered the paper sack
with the four cans of number three beans in it onto the hall table. She was too tired
to take her arms from around it or to straighten up and she hung there collapsed
from the hips, her head balanced like a big florid vegetable at the top of the sack.
She gazed with stony unrecognition at the face that confronted her in the dark
yellow-spotted mirror over the table. Against her right cheek was a gritty collard
leaf that had been stuck there half the way home. She gave it a vicious swipe with
her arm and straightened up, muttering, “Collards, collards,” in a voice of sultry
subdued wrath. Standing up straight, she was a short woman, shaped nearly like a
funeral urn. She had mulberry-colored hair stacked in sausage rolls around her
head but some of these had come loose with the heat and the long walk from the
grocery store and pointed frantically in various directions. “Collard greens!” she
said, spitting the word fromher mouth this time as if it were a poisonous seed.
She and Bill Hill hadn’t eaten collard greens for five years and she wasn’t
going to start cooking them now. She had bought these on account of Rufus but she
wasn’t going to buy them but once. You would have thought that after two years in
the armed forces Rufus would have come back ready to eat like somebody from
somewhere; but no. When she asked him what he would like to have special, he
had not had the gumption to think of one civilized dish—he had said collard
greens. She had expected Rufus to have turned out into somebody with some get in
him. Well, he had about as much get as a floor mop.
Rufus was her baby brother who had just come back from the European
Theater. He had come to live with her because Pitman where they were raised
was not there any more. All the people who had lived in Pitman had had the good
sense to leave it, either by dying or by moving to the city. She had married Bill B.
Hill, a Florida man who sold Miracle Products, and had come to live in the city. If
Pitman had still been there, Rufus would have been in Pitman. If one chicken had
been left to walk across the road in Pitman, Rufus would have been there too to
keep him company. She didn’t like to admit it about her own kin, least about her
own brother, but there he was—good for absolutely nothing. “I seen it after five
minutes of him,” she had told Bill Hill and Bill Hill, with no expression
whatsoever, had said, “It taken me three.” It was mortifying to let that kind of a
husband see you had that kind of a brother.
She supposed there was no help for it. Rufus was like the other children. She
was the only one in her family who had been different, who had had any get. She
took a stub of pencil from her pocketbook and wrote on the side of the sack: Bill
you bring this upstairs. Then she braced herself at the bottom of the steps for the
climb to the fourth floor.
The steps were thin black rent in the middle of the house, covered with a
mole-colored carpet that looked as if it grew fromthe floor. They stuck straight up
like steeple steps, it seemed to her. They reared up. The minute she stood at the
bottom of them, they reared up and got steeper for her benefit. As she gazed up
them, her mouth widened and turned down in a look of complete disgust. She was
in no condition to go up anything. She was sick. Madam Zoleeda had told her but
not before she knew it herself.
Madam Zoleeda was the palmist on Highway 87. She had said, “A long
illness,” but she had added, whispering, with a very I-al-ready-know-but-I-won’ttell
look, “It will bring you a stroke of good fortune!” and then had sat back
grinning, a stout woman with green eyes that moved in their sockets as if they had
been oiled. Ruby didn’t need to be told. She had already figured out the good
fortune. Moving. For two months she had had a distinct feeling that they were
going to move. Bill Hill couldn’t hold off much longer. He couldn’t kill her.
Where she wanted to be was in a subdivision—she started up the steps, leaning
forward and holding onto the banisters—where you had your drugstores and
grocery and a picture show right in your own neighborhood. As it was now, living
downtown, she had to walk eight blocks to the main business streets and farther
than that to get to a supermarket. She hadn’t made any complaints for five years
much but now with her health at stake as young as she was what did he think she
was going to do, kill herself? She had her eye on a place in Meadowcrest Heights,
a duplex bungalow with yellow awnings. She stopped on the fifth step to blow. As
young as she was—thirty-four—you wouldn’t think five steps would stew her.
You better take it easy, baby, she told herself, you’re too young to bust your gears.
Thirty-four wasn’t old, wasn’t any age at all. She remembered her mother at
thirty-four—she had looked like a puckered-up old yellow apple, sour, she had
always looked sour, she had always looked like she wasn’t satisfied with
anything. She compared herself at thirty-four with her mother at that age. Her
mother’s hair had been gray—hers wouldn’t be gray now even if she hadn’t
touched it up. All those children were what did her mother in—eight of them: two
born dead, one died the first year, one crushed under a mowing machine. Her
mother had got deader with every one of them. And all of for what? Because she
hadn’t known any better. Pure ignorance. The purest of downright ignorance!
And there her two sisters were, both married four years with four children
apiece. She didn’t see how they stood it, always going to the doctor to be jabbed
at with instruments. She remembered when her mother had had Rufus. She was the
only one of the children who couldn’t stand it and she walked all the way in to
Melsy, in the hot sun ten miles, to the picture show to get clear of the screaming,
and had sat through two westerns and a horror picture and a serial and then had
walked all the way back and found it was just beginning, and she had had to listen
all night. All that misery for Rufus! And him turned out now to have no more
charge than a dish rag. She saw him waiting out nowhere before he was born, just
waiting, waiting to make his mother, only thirty-four, into an old woman. She
gripped the banister rail fiercely and heaved herself up another step, shaking her
head. Lord, she was disappointed in him! After she had told all her friends her
brother was back from the European Theater, here he comes—sounding like he’d
never been out of a hog lot.
He looked old too. He looked older than she did and he was fourteen years
younger. She was extremely young looking for her age. Not that thirty-four is any
age and anyway she was married. She had to smile, thinking about that, because
she had done so much better than her sisters—they had married from around.
“This breathlessness,” she muttered, stopping again. She decided she would have
to sit down.
There were twenty-eight steps in each flight—twenty-eight.
She sat down and jumped quickly, feeling something under her. She caught her
breath and then pulled the thing out: it was Hartley Gilfeet’s pistol. Nine inches of
treacherous tin! He was a six-year-old boy who lived on the fifth floor. If he had
been hers, she’d have worn him out so hard so many times he wouldn’t know how
to leave his mess on a public stair. She could have fallen down those stairs as
easy as not and ruined herself! But his stupid mother wasn’t going to do anything
to him even if she told her. All she did was scream at him and tell people how
smart he was. “Little Mister Good Fortune!” she called him. “All his poor daddy
left me!” His daddy had said on his death bed, “There’s nothing but him I ever
given you,” and she had said, “Rodman, you given me a fortune!” and so she
called himLittle Mister Good Fortune. “I’d wear the seat of his good fortune out!”
Ruby muttered.
The steps were going up and down like a seesaw with her in the middle of it.
She did not want to get nauseated. Not that again. Now no. No. She was not. She
sat tightly to the steps with her eyes shut until the dizziness stopped a little and the
nausea subsided. No, I’m not going to no doctor, she said. No. No. She was not.
They would have to carry her there knocked out before she would go. She had
done all right doctoring herself all these years—no bad sick spells, no teeth out,
no children, all that by herself. She would have had five children right now if she
hadn’t been careful.
She had wondered more than once if this breathlessness could be heart
trouble. Once in a while, going up the steps, there’d be a pain in her chest along
with it. That was what she wanted it to be—heart trouble. They couldn’t very well
remove your heart. They’d have to knock her in the head before they’d get her near
a hospital, they’d have to—suppose she would die if they didn’t?
She wouldn’t.
Suppose she would?
She made herself stop this gory thinking. She was only thirty-four. There was
nothing permanent wrong with her. She was fat and her color was good. She
thought of herself again in comparison with her mother at thirty-four and she
pinched her arm and smiled. Seeing that her mother or father neither had been
much to look at, she had done very well. They had been the dried-up type, dried
up and Pitman dried into them, them and Pitman shrunk down into something all
dried and puckered up. And she had come out of that! A somebody as alive as her!
She got up, gripping the banister rail but smiling to herself. She was warm and fat
and beautiful and not too fat because Bill Hill liked her that way. She had gained
some weight but he hadn’t noticed except that he was maybe more happy lately
and didn’t know why. She felt the wholeness of herself, a whole thing climbing the
stairs. She was up the first flight now and she looked back, pleased. As soon as
Bill Hill fell down these steps once, maybe they would move. But they would
move before that! Madam Zoleeda had known. She laughed aloud and moved on
down the hall. Mr. Jerger’s door grated and startled her. Oh Lord, she thought,
him. He was a second-floor resident who was peculiar.
He peered at her coming down the hall. “Good morning!” he said, bowing the
upper part of his body out the door. “Good morning to you!” He looked like a
goat. He had little raisin eyes and a string beard and his jacket was a green that
was almost black or a black that was almost green.
“Morning,” she said. “Hower you?”
“Well!” he screamed. “Well indeed on this glorious day!” He was seventyeight
years old and his face looked as if it had mildew on it. In the mornings he
studied and in the afternoons he walked up and down the sidewalks, stopping
children and asking them questions. Whenever he heard anyone in the hall, he
opened his door and looked out.
“Yeah, it’s a nice day,” she said languidly.
“Do you know what great birthday this is?” he asked.
“Uh-uh,” Ruby said. He always had a question like that. A history question that
nobody knew; he would ask it and then make a speech on it. He used to teach in a
high school.
“Guess,” he urged her.
“AbrahamLincoln,” she muttered.
“Hah! You are not trying,” he said. “Try.”
“George Washington,” she said, starting up the stairs.
“Shame on you!” he cried. “And your husband from there! Florida! Florida!
Florida’s birthday,” he shouted. “Come in here.” He disappeared into his room,
beckoning a long finger at her.
She came down the two steps and said, “I gotta be going,” and stuck her head
inside the door. The room was the size of a large closet and the walls were
completely covered with picture postcards of local buildings; this gave an illusion
of space. A single transparent bulb hung down on Mr. Jerger and a small table.
“Now examine this,” he said. He was bending over a book, running his finger
under the lines: “‘On Easter Sunday, April 3, 1516, he arrived on the tip of this
continent.’ Do you know who this he was?” he demanded.
“Yeah, Christopher Columbus.” Ruby said.
“Ponce de Leon!” he screamed. “Ponce de Leon! You should know something
about Florida,” he said. “Your husband is fromFlorida.”
“Yeah, he was born in Miami,” Ruby said. “He’s not fromTennessee.”
“Florida is not a noble state,” Mr. Jerger said, “but it is an important one.”
“It’s important alrighto,” Ruby said.
“Do you know who Ponce de Leon was?”
“He was the founder of Florida,” Ruby said brightly.
“He was a Spaniard,” Mr. Jerger said. “Do you know what he was looking
for?”
“Florida,” Ruby said.
“Ponce de Leon was looking for the fountain of youth,” Mr. Jerger said,
closing his eyes.
“Oh,” Ruby muttered.
“A certain spring,” Mr. Jerger went on, “whose water gave perpetual youth to
those who drank it. In other words,” he said, “he was trying to be young always.”
“Did he find it?” Ruby asked.
Mr. Jerger paused with his eyes still closed. After a minute he said, “Do you
think he found it? Do you think he found it? Do you think nobody else would have
got to it if he had found it? Do you think there would be one person living on this
earth who hadn’t drunk it?”
“I hadn’t thought,” Ruby said.
“Nobody thinks any more,” Mr. Jerger complained.
“I got to be going.”
“Yes, it’s been found,” Mr. Jerger said.
“Where at?” Ruby asked.
“I have drunk of it.”
“Where’d you have to go to?” she asked. She leaned a little closer and got a
whiff of himthat was like putting her nose under a buzzard’s wing.
“Into my heart,” he said, placing his hand over it.
“Oh.” Ruby moved back. “I gotta be going. I think my brother’s home.” She got
over the door sill.
“Ask your husband if he knows what great birthday this is,” Mr. Jerger said,
looking at her coyly.
“Yeah, I will.” She turned and waited until she heard his door click. She
looked back to see that it was shut and then she blew out her breath and stood
facing the dark remaining steep of steps. “God Almighty,” she commented. They
got darker and steeper as you went up.
By the time she had climbed five steps her breath was gone. She continued up
a few more, blowing. Then she stopped. There was a pain in her stomach. It was a
pain like a piece of something pushing something else. She had felt it before, a
few days ago. It was the one that frightened her most. She had thought the word
cancer once and dropped it instantly because no horror like that was coming to
her because it couldn’t. The word came back to her immediately with the pain but
she slashed it in two with Madam Zoleeda. It will end in good fortune. She
slashed it twice through and then again until there were only pieces of it that
couldn’t be recognized. She was going to stop on the next floor—God, if she ever
got up there—and talk to Laverne Watts. Laverne Watts was a third-floor resident,
the secretary to a chiropodist, and an especial friend of hers.
She got up there, gasping and feeling as if her knees were full of fizz, and
knocked on Laverne’s door with the butt of Hartley Gilfeet’s gun. She leaned on
the door frame to rest and suddenly the floor around her dropped on both sides.
The walls turned black and she felt herself reeling, without breath, in the middle
of the air, terrified at the drop that was coming. She saw the door open a great
distance away and Laverne, about four inches high, standing in it.
Laverne, a tall straw-haired girl, let out a great guffaw and slapped her side as
if she had just opened the door on the most comical sight she had yet seen. “That
gun!” she yelled. “That gun! That look!” She staggered back to the sofa and fell on
it, her legs rising higher than her hips and falling down again helplessly with a
thud.
The floor came up to where Ruby could see it and remained, dipping a little.
With a terrible stare of concentration, she stepped down to get on it. She
scrutinized a chair across the room and then headed for it, putting her feet
carefully one before the other.
“You should be in a wild-west show!” Laverne Watts said. “You’re a howl!”
Ruby reached the chair and then edged herself onto it. “Shut up,” she said
hoarsely.
Laverne sat forward, pointing at her, and then fell back on the sofa, shaking
again.
“Quit that!” Ruby yelled. “Quit that! I’msick.”
Laverne got up and took two or three long strides across the room. She leaned
down in front of Ruby and looked into her face with one eye shut as if she were
squinting through a keyhole. “You are sort of purple,” she said.
“I’mdamn sick,” Ruby glowered.
Laverne stood looking at her and after a second she folded her arms and very
pointedly stuck her stomach out and began to sway back and forth. “Well, what’d
you come in here with that gun for? Where’d you get it?” she asked.
“Sat on it,” Ruby muttered.
Laverne stood there, swaying with her stomach stuck out, and a very wise
expression growing on her face. Ruby sat sprawled in the chair, looking at her
feet. The room was getting still. She sat up and glared at her ankles. They were
swollen! I’m not going to no doctor, she started, I’m not going to one. I’m not
going. “Not going,” she began to mumble, “to no doctor, not…”
“How long you think you can hold off?” Laverne murmured and began to
giggle.
“Are my ankles swollen?” Ruby asked.
“They look like they’ve always looked to me,” Laverne said, throwing herself
down on the sofa again. “Kind of fat.” She lifted her own ankles up on the end
pillow and turned them slightly. “How do you like these shoes?” she asked. They
were a grasshopper green with very high thin heels.
“I think they’re swollen,” Ruby said. “When I was coming up that last flight of
stairs I had the awfulest feeling, all over me like…”
“You ought to go on to the doctor.”
“I don’t need to go to no doctor,” Ruby muttered. “I can take care of myself. I
haven’t done bad at it all this time.”
“Is Rufus at home?”
“I don’t know. I kept myself away fromdoctors all my life. I kept—why?”
“Why what?”
“Why, is Rufus at home?”
“Rufus is cute,” Laverne said. “I thought I’d ask himhow he liked my shoes.”
Ruby sat up with a fierce look, very pink and purple. “Why Rufus?” she
growled. “He ain’t but a baby.” Laverne was thirty years old. “He don’t care
about women’s shoes.”
Laverne sat up and took off one of the shoes and peered inside it. “Nine B,”
she said. “I bet he’d like what’s in it.”
“That Rufus ain’t but an enfant!” Ruby said. “He don’t have time to be looking
at your feet. He ain’t got that kind of time.”
“Oh, he’s got plenty of time,” Laverne said.
“Yeah,” Ruby muttered and saw him again, waiting, with plenty of time, out
nowhere before he was born, just waiting to make his mother that much deader.
“I believe your ankles are swollen,” Laverne said.
“Yeah,” Ruby said, twisting them. “Yeah. They feel tight sort of. I had the
awfulest feeling when I got up those steps, like sort of out of breath all over, sort
of tight all over, sort of—awful.”
“You ought to go on to the doctor.”
“No.”
“You ever been to one?”
“They carried me once when I was ten,” Ruby said, “but I got away. Three of
themholding me didn’t do any good.”
“What was it that time?”
“What you looking at me that way for?” Ruby muttered.
“What way?”
“That way,” Ruby said, “—swagging out that stomach of yours that way.”
“I just asked you what it was that time?”
“It was a boil. A nigger woman up the road told me what to do and I did it and
it went away.” She sat slumped on the edge of the chair, staring in front of her as if
she were remembering an easier time.
Laverne began to do a kind of comic dance up and down the room. She took
two or three slow steps in one direction with her knees bent and then she came
back and kicked her leg slowly and painfully in the other. She began to sing in a
loud guttural voice, rolling her eyes, “Put them all together, they spell MOTHER!
MOTHER!” and stretching out her arms as if she were on the stage.
Ruby’s mouth opened wordlessly and her fierce expression vanished. For a
half-second she was motionless; then she sprang from the chair. “Not me!” she
shouted. “Not me!”
Laverne stopped and only watched her with the wise look.
“Not me!” Ruby shouted. “Oh no not me! Bill Hill takes care of that. Bill Hill
takes care of that! Bill Hill’s been taking care of that for five years! That ain’t
going to happen to me!”
“Well old Bill Hill just slipped up about four or five months ago, my friend,”
Laverne said. “Just slipped up…”
“I don’t reckon you know anything about it, you ain’t even married, you ain’t
even…”
“I bet it’s not one, I bet it’s two,” Laverne said. “You better go on to the
doctor and find out how many it is.”
“It is not!” Ruby shrilled. She thought she was so smart! She didn’t know a
sick woman when she saw one, all she could do was look at her feet and shoe em
to Rufus, shoe em to Rufus and he was an enfant and she was thirty-four years old.
“Rufus is an enfant!” she wailed.
“That will make two!” Laverne said.
“You shut up talking like that!” Ruby shouted. “You shut up this minute. I ain’t
going to have any baby!”
“Ha ha,” Laverne said.
“I don’t know how you think you know so much,” Ruby said, “single as you
are. If I was so single I wouldn’t go around telling married people what their
business is.”
“Not just your ankles,” Laverne said, “you’re swollen all over.”
“I ain’t going to stay here and be insulted,” Ruby said and walked carefully to
the door, keeping herself erect and not looking down at her stomach the way she
wanted to.
“Well I hope all of you feel better tomorrow,” Laverne said.
“I think my heart will be better tomorrow,” Ruby said. “But I hope we will be
moving soon. I can’t climb these steps with this heart trouble and,” she added with
a dignified glare, “Rufus don’t care nothing about your big feet.”
“You better put that gun up,” Laverne said, “before you shoot somebody.”
Ruby slammed the door shut and looked down at herself quickly. She was big
there but she had always had a kind of big stomach. She did not stick out there
different from the way she did any place else. It was natural when you took on
some weight to take it on in the middle and Bill Hill didn’t mind her being fat, he
was just more happy and didn’t know why. She saw Bill Hill’s long happy face,
grinning at her from the eyes downward in a way he had as if his look got happier
as it neared his teeth. He would never slip up. She rubbed her hand across her
skirt and felt the tightness of it but hadn’t she felt that before? She had. It was the
skirt—she had on the tight one that she didn’t wear often, she had … she didn’t
have on the tight skirt. She had on the loose one. But it wasn’t very loose. But that
didn’t make any difference, she was just fat.
She put her fingers on her stomach and pushed down and took themoff quickly.
She began walking toward the stairs, slowly, as if the floor were going to move
under her. She began the steps. The pain came back at once. It came back with the
first step. “No,” she whimpered, “no.” It was just a little feeling, just a little
feeling like a piece of her inside rolling over but it made her breath tighten in her
throat. Nothing in her was supposed to roll over. “Just one step,” she whispered,
“Just one step and it did it.” It couldn’t be cancer. Madam Zoleeda said it would
end in good fortune. She began crying and saying, “Just one step and it did it,” and
going on up them absently as if she thought she were standing still. On the sixth
one, she sat down suddenly, her hand slipping weakly down the banister spoke
onto the floor.
“Noooo,” she said and leaned her round red face between the two nearest
poles. She looked down into the stairwell and gave a long hollow wail that
widened and echoed as it went down. The stair cavern was dark green and molecolored
and the wail sounded at the very bottom like a voice answering her. She
gasped and shut her eyes. No. No. It couldn’t be any baby. She was not going to
have something waiting in her to make her deader, she was not. Bill Hill couldn’t
have slipped up. He said it was guaranteed and it had worked all this time and it
could not be that, it could not. She shuddered and held her hand tightly over her
mouth. She felt her face drawn puckered: two born dead one died the first year
and one run under like a dried yellow apple no she was only thirty-four years old,
she was old. Madam Zoleeda said it would end in no drying up. Madam Zoleeda
said oh but it will end in a stroke of good fortune! Moving. She had said it would
end in a stroke of good moving.
She felt herself getting calmer. She felt herself, after a minute, getting almost
calm and thought she got upset too easy; heck, it was gas. Madam Zoleeda hadn’t
been wrong about anything yet, she knew more than …
She jumped: there was a bang at the bottom of the stairwell and a rumble
rattling up the steps, shaking them even up where she was. She looked through the
banister poles and saw Hartley Gilfeet, with two pistols leveled, galloping up the
stairs and heard a voice pierce down from the floor over her, “You Hartley, shut
up that racket! You’re shaking the house!” But he came on, thundering louder as he
rounded the bend on the first floor and streaked up the hall. She saw Mr. Jerger’s
door fly open and him spring with clawed fingers and grasp a flying piece of shirt
that whirled and shot off again with a high-pitched, “Leggo, you old goat teacher!”
and came on nearer until the stairs rumbled directly under her and a charging
chipmunk face crashed into her and rocketed through her head, smaller and
smaller into a whirl of dark.
She sat on the step, clutching the banister spoke while the breath came back
into her a thimbleful at a time and the stairs stopped seesawing. She opened her
eyes and gazed down into the dark hold, down to the very bottom where she had
started up so long ago. “Good Fortune,” she said in a hollow voice that echoed
along all the levels of the cavern, “Baby.”
“Good Fortune, Baby,” the three echoes leered.
Then she recognized the feeling again, a little roll. It was as if it were not in
her stomach. It was as if it were out nowhere in nothing, out nowhere, resting and
waiting, with plenty of time.