ALL weekend the two girls were calling each other Temple One and Temple Two,
shaking with laughter and getting so red and hot that they were positively ugly,
particularly Joanne who had spots on her face anyway. They came in the brown
convent uniforms they had to wear at Mount St. Scholastica but as soon as they
opened their suitcases, they took off the uniforms and put on red skirts and loud
blouses. They put on lipstick and their Sunday shoes and walked around in the
high heels all over the house, always passing the long mirror in the hall slowly to
get a look at their legs. None of their ways were lost on the child. If only one of
them had come, that one would have played with her, but since there were two of
them, she was out of it and watched themsuspiciously froma distance.
They were fourteen—two years older than she was—but neither of them was
bright, which was why they had been sent to the convent. If they had gone to a
regular school, they wouldn’t have done anything but think about boys; at the
convent the sisters, her mother said, would keep a grip on their necks. The child
decided, after observing them for a few hours, that they were practically morons
and she was glad to think that they were only second cousins and she couldn’t
have inherited any of their stupidity. Susan called herself Su-zan. She was very
skinny but she had a pretty pointed face and red hair. Joanne had yellow hair that
was naturally curly but she talked through her nose and when she laughed, she
turned purple in patches. Neither one of them could say an intelligent thing and all
their sentences began, “You know this boy I know well one time he…”
They were to stay all weekend and her mother said she didn’t see how she
would entertain them since she didn’t know any boys their age. At this, the child,
struck suddenly with genius, shouted, “There’s Cheat! Get Cheat to come! Ask
Miss Kirby to get Cheat to come show themaround!” and she nearly choked on the
food she had in her mouth. She doubled over laughing and hit the table with her
fist and looked at the two bewildered girls while water started in her eyes and
rolled down her fat cheeks and the braces she had in her mouth glared like tin. She
had never thought of anything so funny before.
Her mother laughed in a guarded way and Miss Kirby blushed and carried her
fork delicately to her mouth with one pea on it. She was a long-faced blonde
schoolteacher who boarded with them and Mr. Cheatam was her admirer, a rich
old farmer who arrived every Saturday afternoon in a fifteen-year-old baby-blue
Pontiac powdered with red clay dust and black inside with Negroes that he
charged ten cents apiece to bring into town on Saturday afternoons. After he
dumped them he came to see Miss Kirby, always bringing a little gift—a bag of
boiled peanuts or a watermelon or a stalk of sugar cane and once a wholesale box
of Baby Ruth candy bars. He was bald-headed except for a little fringe of rustcolored
hair and his face was nearly the same color as the unpaved roads and
washed like them with ruts and gulleys. He wore a pale green shirt with a thin
black stripe in it and blue galluses and his trousers cut across a protruding
stomach that he pressed tenderly from time to time with his big flat thumb. All his
teeth were backed with gold and he would roll his eyes at Miss Kirby in an
impish way and say, “Haw haw,” sitting in their porch swing with his legs spread
apart and his hightopped shoes pointing in opposite directions on the floor.
“I don’t think Cheat is going to be in town this weekend,” Miss Kirby said, not
in the least understanding that this was a joke, and the child was convulsed afresh,
threw herself backward in her chair, fell out of it, rolled on the floor and lay there
heaving. Her mother told her if she didn’t stop this foolishness she would have to
leave the table.
Yesterday her mother had arranged withAlonzo Myers to drive them the fortyfive
miles to Mayville, where the convent was, to get the girls for the weekend
and Sunday afternoon he was hired to drive them back again. He was an eighteenyear-old
boy who weighed two hundred and fifty pounds and worked for the taxi
company and he was all you could get to drive you anywhere. He smoked or
rather chewed a short black cigar and he had a round sweaty chest that showed
through the yellow nylon shirt he wore. When he drove all the windows of the car
had to be open.
“Well there’s Alonzo!” the child roared from the floor. “Get Alonzo to show
emaround! Get Alonzo!”
The two girls, who had seen Alonzo, began to screamtheir indignation.
Her mother thought this was funny too but she said, “That’ll be about enough
out of you,” and changed the subject. She asked them why they called each other
Temple One and Temple Two and this sent them off into gales of giggles. Finally
they managed to explain. Sister Perpetua, the oldest nun at the Sisters of Mercy in
Mayville, had given them a lecture on what to do if a young man should—here
they laughed so hard they were not able to go on without going back to the
beginning—on what to do if a young man should—they put their heads in their laps
—on what to do if—they finally managed to shout it out—if he should “behave in
an ungentlemanly manner with them in the back of an automobile.” Sister Perpetua
said they were to say, “Stop sir! I am a Temple of the Holy Ghost!” and that
would put an end to it. The child sat up off the floor with a blank face. She didn’t
see anything so funny in this. What was really funny was the idea of Mr. Cheatam
or Alonzo Myers beauing themaround. That killed her.
Her mother didn’t laugh at what they had said. “I think you girls are pretty
silly,” she said. “After all, that’s what you are—Temples of the Holy Ghost.”
The two of them looked up at her, politely concealing their giggles, but with
astonished faces as if they were beginning to realize that she was made of the
same stuff as Sister Perpetua.
Miss Kirby preserved her set expression and the child thought, it’s all over her
head anyhow. I am a Temple of the Holy Ghost, she said to herself, and was
pleased with the phrase. It made her feel as if somebody had given her a present.
After dinner, her mother collapsed on the bed and said, “Those girls are going
to drive me crazy if I don’t get some entertainment for them. They’re awful.”
“I bet I know who you could get,” the child started.
“Now listen. I don’t want to hear any more about Mr. Cheatam,” her mother
said. “You embarrass Miss Kirby. He’s her only friend. Oh my Lord,” and she sat
up and looked mournfully out the window, “that poor soul is so lonesome she’ll
even ride in that car that smells like the last circle in hell.”
And she’s a Temple of the Holy Ghost too, the child reflected. “I wasn’t
thinking of him,” she said. “I was thinking of those two Wilkinses, Wendell and
Cory, that visit old lady Buchell out on her farm. They’re her grandsons. They
work for her.”
“Now that’s an idea,” her mother murmured and gave her an appreciative
look. But then she slumped again. “They’re only farmboys. These girls would turn
up their noses at them.”
“Huh,” the child said. “They wear pants. They’re sixteen and they got a car.
Somebody said they were both going to be Church of God preachers because you
don’t have to know nothing to be one.”
“They would be perfectly safe with those boys all right,” her mother said and
in a minute she got up and called their grandmother on the telephone and after she
had talked to the old woman a half an hour, it was arranged that Wendell and Cory
would come to supper and afterwards take the girls to the fair.
Susan and Joanne were so pleased that they washed their hair and rolled it up
on aluminum curlers. Hah, thought the child, sitting cross-legged on the bed to
watch them undo the curlers, wait’ll you get a load of Wendell and Cory! “You’ll
like these boys,” she said. “Wendell is six feet tall ands got red hair. Cory is six
feet six inches talls got black hair and wears a sport jacket and they gottem this
car with a squirrel tail on the front.”
“How does a child like you know so much about these men?” Susan asked and
pushed her face up close to the mirror to watch the pupils in her eyes dilate.
The child lay back on the bed and began to count the narrow boards in the
ceiling until she lost her place. I know them all right, she said to someone. We
fought in the world war together. They were under me and I saved them five times
from Japanese suicide divers and Wendell said I am going to marry that kid and
the other said oh no you ain’t I am and I said neither one of you is because I will
court marshall you all before you can bat an eye. “I’ve seen them around is all,”
she said.
When they came the girls stared at them a second and then began to giggle and
talk to each other about the convent. They sat in the swing together and Wendell
and Cory sat on the banisters together. They sat like monkeys, their knees on a
level with their shoulders and their arms hanging down between. They were short
thin boys with red faces and high cheekbones and pale seed-like eyes. They had
brought a harmonica and a guitar. One of them began to blow softly on the mouth
organ, watching the girls over it, and the other started strumming the guitar and
then began to sing, not watching them but keeping his head tilted upward as if he
were only interested in hearing himself. He was singing a hillbilly song that
sounded half like a love song and half like a hymn.
The child was standing on a barrel pushed into some bushes at the side of the
house, her face on a level with the porch floor. The sun was going down and the
sky was turning a bruised violet color that seemed to be connected with the sweet
mournful sound of the music. Wendell began to smile as he sang and to look at the
girls. He looked at Susan with a dog-like loving look and sang,
“I’ve found a friend in Jesus,
He’s everything to me,
He’s the lily of the valley,
He’s the One who’s set me free!”
Then he turned the same look on Joanne and sang,
“A wall of fire about me,
I’ve nothing now to fear,
He’s the lily of the valley,
And I’ll always have Him near!”
The girls looked at each other and held their lips stiff so as not to giggle but
Susan let out one anyway and clapped her hand on her mouth. The singer frowned
and for a few seconds only strummed the guitar. Then he began “The Old Rugged
Cross” and they listened politely but when he had finished they said, “Let us sing
one!” and before he could start another, they began to sing with their conventtrained
voices,
“Tantum ergo Sacramentum
Veneremur Cernui:
Et antiquum documentum
Novo cedat ritui:”
The child watched the boys’ solemn faces turn with perplexed frowning stares
at each other as if they were uncertain whether they were being made fun of.
“Praestet fides supplementum
Sensuum defectui.
Genitori, Genitoque
Laus et jubilatio
Salus, honor, virtus quoque…”
The boys’ faces were dark red in the gray-purple light. They looked fierce and
startled.
“Sit et benedictio;
Procedenti ab utroque
Com par sit laudatio.
Amen.”
The girls dragged out the Amen and then there was a silence.
“That must be Jew singing,” Wendell said and began to tune the guitar.
The girls giggled idiotically but the child stamped her foot on the barrel. “You
big dumb ox!” she shouted. “You big dumb Church of God ox!” she roared and
fell off the barrel and scrambled up and shot around the corner of the house as they
jumped fromthe banister to see who was shouting.
Her mother had arranged for them to have supper in the back yard and she had
a table laid out there under some Japanese lanterns that she pulled out for garden
parties. “I ain’t eating with them,” the child said and snatched her plate off the
table and carried it to the kitchen and sat down with the thin blue-gummed cook
and ate her supper.
“Howcome you be so ugly sometime?” the cook asked.
“Those stupid idiots,” the child said.
The lanterns gilded the leaves of the trees orange on the level where they hung
and above them was black-green and below them were different dim muted colors
that made the girls sitting at the table look prettier than they were. From time to
time, the child turned her head and glared out the kitchen window at the scene
below.
“God could strike you deaf dumb and blind,” the cook said, “and then you
wouldn’t be as smart as you is.”
“I would still be smarter than some,” the child said.
After supper they left for the fair. She wanted to go to the fair but not with
them so even if they had asked her she wouldn’t have gone. She went upstairs and
paced the long bedroom with her hands locked together behind her back and her
head thrust forward and an expression, fierce and dreamy both, on her face. She
didn’t turn on the electric light but let the darkness collect and make the room
smaller and more private. At regular intervals a light crossed the open window
and threw shadows on the wall. She stopped and stood looking out over the dark
slopes, past where the pond glinted silver, past the wall of woods to the speckled
sky where a long finger of light was revolving up and around and away, searching
the air as if it were hunting for the lost sun. It was the beacon light fromthe fair.
She could hear the distant sound of the calliope and she saw in her head all the
tents raised up in a kind of gold sawdust light and the diamond ring of the ferris
wheel going around and around up in the air and down again and the screeking
merry-go-round going around and around on the ground. A fair lasted five or six
days and there was a special afternoon for school children and a special night for
niggers. She had gone last year on the afternoon for school children and had seen
the monkeys and the fat man and had ridden on the ferris wheel. Certain tents were
closed then because they contained things that would be known only to grown
people but she had looked with interest at the advertising on the closed tents, at
the faded-looking pictures on the canvas of people in tights, with stiff stretched
composed faces like the faces of the martyrs waiting to have their tongues cut out
by the Roman soldier. She had imagined that what was inside these tents
concerned medicine and she had made up her mind to be a doctor when she grew
up.
She had since changed and decided to be an engineer but as she looked out the
window and followed the revolving searchlight as it widened and shortened and
wheeled in its arc, she felt that she would have to be much more than just a doctor
or an engineer. She would have to be a saint because that was the occupation that
included everything you could know; and yet she knew she would never be a saint.
She did not steal or murder but she was a born liar and slothful and she sassed her
mother and was deliberately ugly to almost everybody. She was eaten up also
with the sin of Pride, the worst one. She made fun of the Baptist preacher who
came to the school at commencement to give the devotional. She would pull down
her mouth and hold her forehead as if she were in agony and groan, “Fawther, we
thank Thee,” exactly the way he did and she had been told many times not to do it.
She could never be a saint, but she thought she could be a martyr if they killed her
quick.
She could stand to be shot but not to be burned in oil. She didn’t know if she
could stand to be torn to pieces by lions or not. She began to prepare her
martyrdom, seeing herself in a pair of tights in a great arena, lit by the early
Christians hanging in cages of fire, making a gold dusty light that fell on her and
the lions. The first lion charged forward and fell at her feet, converted. A whole
series of lions did the same. The lions liked her so much she even slept with them
and finally the Romans were obliged to burn her but to their astonishment she
would not burn down and finding she was so hard to kill, they finally cut off her
head very quickly with a sword and she went immediately to heaven. She
rehearsed this several times, returning each time at the entrance of Paradise to the
lions.
Finally she got up from the window and got ready for bed and got in without
saying her prayers. There were two heavy double beds in the room. The girls
were occupying the other one and she tried to think of something cold and clammy
that she could hide in their bed but her thought was fruitless. She didn’t have
anything she could think of, like a chicken carcass or a piece of beef liver. The
sound of the calliope coming through the window kept her awake and she
remembered that she hadn’t said her prayers and got up and knelt down and began
them. She took a running start and went through to the other side of the Apostle’s
Creed and then hung by her chin on the side of the bed, empty-minded. Her
prayers, when she remembered to say them, were usually perfunctory but
sometimes when she had done something wrong or heard music or lost something,
or sometimes for no reason at all, she would be moved to fervor and would think
of Christ on the long journey to Calvary, crushed three times on the rough cross.
Her mind would stay on this a while and then get empty and when something
roused her, she would find that she was thinking of a different thing entirely, of
some dog or some girl or something she was going to do some day. Tonight,
remembering Wendell and Cory, she was filled with thanksgiving and almost
weeping with delight, she said, “Lord, Lord, thank You that I’m not in the Church
of God, thank You Lord, thank You!” and got back in bed and kept repeating it
until she went to sleep.
The girls came in at a quarter to twelve and waked her up with their giggling.
They turned on the small blue-shaded lamp to see to get undressed by and their
skinny shadows climbed up the wall and broke and continued moving about softly
on the ceiling. The child sat up to hear what all they had seen at the fair. Susan had
a plastic pistol full of cheap candy and Joanne a pasteboard cat with red polka
dots on it. “Did you see the monkeys dance?” the child asked. “Did you see that fat
man and those midgets?”
“All kinds of freaks,” Joanne said. And then she said to Susan, “I enjoyed it all
but the you-know-what,” and her face assumed a peculiar expression as if she had
bit into something that she didn’t know if she liked or not.
The other stood still and shook her head once and nodded slightly at the child.
“Little pitchers,” she said in a low voice but the child heard it and her heart began
to beat very fast.
She got out of her bed and climbed onto the footboard of theirs. They turned
off the light and got in but she didn’t move. She sat there, looking hard at them
until their faces were well defined in the dark. “I’m not as old as you all,” she
said, “but I’mabout a million times smarter.”
“There are some things,” Susan said, “that a child of your age doesn’t know,”
and they both began to giggle.
“Go back to your own bed,” Joanne said.
The child didn’t move. “One time,” she said, her voice hollow-sounding in the
dark, “I saw this rabbit have rabbits.”
There was a silence. Then Susan said, “How?” in an indifferent tone and she
knew that she had them. She said she wouldn’t tell until they told about the youknow-what.
Actually she had never seen a rabbit have rabbits but she forgot this
as they began to tell what they had seen in the tent.
It had been a freak with a particular name but they couldn’t remember the
name. The tent where it was had been divided into two parts by a black curtain,
one side for men and one for women. The freak went from one side to the other,
talking first to the men and then to the women, but everyone could hear. The stage
ran all the way across the front. The girls heard the freak say to the men, “I’m
going to show you this and if you laugh, God may strike you the same way.” The
freak had a country voice, slow and nasal and neither high nor low, just flat. “God
made me thisaway and if you laugh He may strike you the same way. This is the
way He wanted me to be and I ain’t disputing His way. I’mshowing you because I
got to make the best of it. I expect you to act like ladies and gentlemen. I never
done it to myself nor had a thing to do with it but I’m making the best of it. I don’t
dispute hit.” Then there was a long silence on the other side of the tent and finally
the freak left the men and came over onto the women’s side and said the same
thing.
The child felt every muscle strained as if she were hearing the answer to a
riddle that was more puzzling than the riddle itself. “You mean it had two heads?”
she said.
“No,” Susan said, “it was a man and woman both. It pulled up its dress and
showed us. It had on a blue dress.”
The child wanted to ask how it could be a man and woman both without two
heads but she did not. She wanted to get back into her own bed and think it out and
she began to climb down off the footboard.
“What about the rabbit?” Joanne asked.
The child stopped and only her face appeared over the footboard, abstracted,
absent. “It spit themout of its mouth,” she said, “six of them.”
She lay in bed trying to picture the tent with the freak walking from side to
side but she was too sleepy to figure it out. She was better able to see the faces of
the country people watching, the men more solemn than they were in church, and
the women stern and polite, with painted-looking eyes, standing as if they were
waiting for the first note of the piano to begin the hymn. She could hear the freak
saying, “God made me thisaway and I don’t dispute hit,” and the people saying,
“Amen. Amen.”
“God done this to me and I praise Him.”
“Amen. Amen.”
“He could strike you thisaway.”
“Amen. Amen.”
“But he has not.”
“Amen.”
“Raise yourself up. A temple of the Holy Ghost. You! You are God’s temple,
don’t you know? Don’t you know? God’s Spirit has a dwelling in you, don’t you
know?”
“Amen. Amen.”
“If anybody desecrates the temple of God, God will bring him to ruin and if
you laugh, He may strike you thisaway. A temple of God is a holy thing. Amen.
Amen.”
“I ama temple of the Holy Ghost.”
“Amen.”
The people began to slap their hands without making a loud noise and with a
regular beat between the Amens, more and more softly, as if they knew there was
a child near, half asleep.
* * *
The next afternoon the girls put on their brown convent uniforms again and the
child and her mother took them back to Mount St. Scholastica. “Oh glory, oh
Pete!” they said. “Back to the salt mines.” Alonzo Myers drove them and the child
sat in front with him and her mother sat in back between the two girls, telling them
such things as how pleased she was to have had them and how they must come
back again and then about the good times she and their mothers had had when they
were girls at the convent. The child didn’t listen to any of this twaddle but kept as
close to the locked door as she could get and held her head out the window. They
had thought Alonzo would smell better on Sunday but he did not. With her hair
blowing over her face she could look directly into the ivory sun which was
framed in the middle of the blue afternoon but when she pulled it away from her
eyes she had to squint.
Mount St. Scholastica was a red brick house set back in a garden in the center
of town. There was a filling station on one side of it and a firehouse on the other.
It had a high black grillework fence around it and narrow bricked walks between
old trees and japonica bushes that were heavy with blooms. A big moon-faced nun
came bustling to the door to let them in and embraced her mother and would have
done the same to her but that she stuck out her hand and preserved a frigid frown,
looking just past the sister’s shoes at the wainscoting. They had a tendency to kiss
even homely children, but the nun shook her hand vigorously and even cracked her
knuckles a little and said they must come to the chapel, that benediction was just
beginning. You put your foot in their door and they got you praying, the child
thought as they hurried down the polished corridor.
You’d think she had to catch a train, she continued in the same ugly vein as
they entered the chapel where the sisters were kneeling on one side and the girls,
all in brown uniforms, on the other. The chapel smelled of incense. It was light
green and gold, a series of springing arches that ended with the one over the altar
where the priest was kneeling in front of the monstrance, bowed low. A small boy
in a surplice was standing behind him, swinging the censer. The child knelt down
between her mother and the nun and they were well into the “Tantum Ergo”
before her ugly thoughts stopped and she began to realize that she was in the
presence of God. Hep me not to be so mean, she began mechanically. Hep me not
to give her so much sass. Hep me not to talk like I do. Her mind began to get quiet
and then empty but when the priest raised the monstrance with the Host shining
ivory-colored in the center of it, she was thinking of the tent at the fair that had the
freak in it. The freak was saying, “I don’t dispute hit. This is the way He wanted
me to be.”
As they were leaving the convent door, the big nun swooped down on her
mischievously and nearly smothered her in the black habit, mashing the side of her
face into the crucifix hitched onto her belt and then holding her off and looking at
her with little periwinkle eyes.
On the way home she and her mother sat in the back and Alonzo drove by
himself in the front. The child observed three folds of fat in the back of his neck
and noted that his ears were pointed almost like a pig’s. Her mother, making
conversation, asked himif he had gone to the fair.
“Gone,” he said, “and never missed a thing and it was good I gone when I did
because they ain’t going to have it next week like they said they was.”
“Why?” asked her mother.
“They shut it on down,” he said. “Some of the preachers from town gone out
and inspected it and got the police to shut it on down.”
Her mother let the conversation drop and the child’s round face was lost in
thought. She turned it toward the window and looked out over a stretch of pasture
land that rose and fell with a gathering greenness until it touched the dark woods.
The sun was a huge red ball like an elevated Host drenched in blood and when it
sank out of sight, it left a line in the sky like a red clay road hanging over the trees.