THE week before, Mary Fortune and the old man had spent every morning
watching the machine that lifted out dirt and threw it in a pile. The construction
was going on by the new lakeside on one of the lots that the old man had sold to
somebody who was going to put up a fishing club. He and Mary Fortune drove
down there every morning about ten o’clock and he parked his car, a battered
mulberry-colored Cadillac, on the embankment that overlooked the spot where the
work was going on. The red corrugated lake eased up to within fifty feet of the
construction and was bordered on the other side by a black line of woods which
appeared at both ends of the view to walk across the water and continue along the
edge of the fields.
He sat on the bumper and Mary Fortune straddled the hood and they watched,
sometimes for hours, while the machine systematically ate a square red hole in
what had once been a cow pasture. It happened to be the only pasture that Pitts had
succeeded in getting the bitterweed off and when the old man had sold it, Pitts had
nearly had a stroke; and as far as Mr. Fortune was concerned, he could have gone
on and had it.
“Any fool that would let a cow pasture interfere with progress is not on my
books,” he had said to Mary Fortune several times from his seat on the bumper,
but the child did not have eyes for anything but the machine. She sat on the hood,
looking down into the red pit, watching the big disembodied gullet gorge itself on
the clay, then, with the sound of a deep sustained nausea and a slow mechanical
revulsion, turn and spit it up. Her pale eyes behind her spectacles followed the
repeated motion of it again and again and her face—a small replica of the old
man’s—never lost its look of complete absorption.
No one was particularly glad that Mary Fortune looked like her grandfather
except the old man himself. He thought it added greatly to her attractiveness. He
thought she was the smartest and the prettiest child he had ever seen and he let the
rest of them know that if, IF that was, he left anything to anybody, it would be
Mary Fortune he left it to. She was now nine, short and broad like himself, with
his very light blue eyes, his wide prominent forehead, his steady penetrating
scowl and his rich florid complexion; but she was like him on the inside too. She
had, to a singular degree, his intelligence, his strong will, and his push and drive.
Though there was seventy years’ difference in their ages, the spiritual distance
between them was slight. She was the only member of the family he had any
respect for.
He didn’t have any use for her mother, his third or fourth daughter (he could
never remember which), though she considered that she took care of him. She
considered—being careful not to say it, only to look it—that she was the one
putting up with him in his old age and that she was the one he should leave the
place to. She had married an idiot named Pitts and had had seven children, all
likewise idiots except the youngest, Mary Fortune, who was a throwback to him.
Pitts was the kind who couldn’t keep his hands on a nickel and Mr. Fortune had
allowed them, ten years ago, to move onto his place and farm it. What Pitts made
went to Pitts but the land belonged to Fortune and he was careful to keep the fact
before them. When the well had gone dry, he had not allowed Pitts to have a deep
well drilled but had insisted that they pipe their water from the spring. He did not
intend to pay for a drilled well himself and he knew that if he let Pitts pay for it,
whenever he had occasion to say to Pitts, “It’s my land you’re sitting on,” Pitts
would be able to say to him, “Well, it’s my pump that’s pumping the water you’re
drinking.”
Being there ten years, the Pittses had got to feel as if they owned the place.
The daughter had been born and raised on it but the old man considered that when
she married Pitts she showed that she preferred Pitts to home; and when she came
back, she came back like any other tenant, though he would not allow them to pay
rent for the same reason he would not allow them to drill a well. Anyone over
sixty years of age is in an uneasy position unless he controls the greater interest
and every now and then he gave the Pittses a practical lesson by selling off a lot.
Nothing infuriated Pitts more than to see him sell off a piece of the property to an
outsider, because Pitts wanted to buy it himself.
Pitts was a thin, long-jawed, irascible, sullen, sulking individual and his wife
was the duty-proud kind: It’s my duty to stay here and take care of Papa. Who
would do it if I didn’t? I do it knowing full well I’ll get no reward for it. I do it
because it’s my duty.
The old man was not taken in by this for a minute. He knew they were waiting
impatiently for the day when they could put himin a hole eight feet deep and cover
himup with dirt. Then, even if he did not leave the place to them, they figured they
would be able to buy it. Secretly he had made his will and left everything in trust
to Mary Fortune, naming his lawyer and not Pitts as executor. When he died Mary
Fortune could make the rest of themjump; and he didn’t doubt for a minute that she
would be able to do it.
Ten years ago they had announced that they were going to name the new baby
Mark Fortune Pitts, after him, if it were a boy, and he had not delayed in telling
them that if they coupled his name with the name Pitts he would put them off the
place. When the baby came, a girl, and he had seen that even at the age of one day
she bore his unmistakable likeness, he had relented and suggested himself that they
name her Mary Fortune, after his beloved mother, who had died seventy years
ago, bringing himinto the world.
The Fortune place was in the country on a clay road that left the paved road
fifteen miles away and he would never have been able to sell off any lots if it had
not been for progress, which had always been his ally. He was not one of these
old people who fight improvement, who object to everything new and cringe at
every change. He wanted to see a paved highway in front of his house with plenty
of new-model cars on it, he wanted to see a supermarket store across the road
from him, he wanted to see a gas station, a motel, a drive-in picture-show within
easy distance. Progress had suddenly set all this in motion. The electric power
company had built a dam on the river and flooded great areas of the surrounding
country and the lake that resulted touched his land along a half-mile stretch. Every
Tom, Dick and Harry, every dog and his brother, wanted a lot on the lake. There
was talk of their getting a telephone line. There was talk of paving the road that
ran in front of the Fortune place. There was talk of an eventual town. He thought
this should be called Fortune, Georgia. He was a man of advanced vision, even if
he was seventy-nine years old.
The machine that drew up the dirt had stopped the day before and today they
were watching the hole being smoothed out by two huge yellow bulldozers. His
property had amounted to eight hundred acres before he began selling lots. He had
sold five twenty-acre lots on the back of the place and every time he sold one,
Pitts’s blood pressure had gone up twenty points. “The Pittses are the kind that
would let a cow pasture interfere with the future,” he said to Mary Fortune, “but
not you and me.” The fact that Mary Fortune was a Pitts too was something he
ignored, in a gentlemanly fashion, as if it were an affliction the child was not
responsible for. He liked to think of her as being thoroughly of his clay. He sat on
the bumper and she sat on the hood with her bare feet on his shoulders. One of the
bulldozers had moved under them to shave the side of the embankment they were
parked on. If he had moved his feet a few inches out, the old man could have
dangled themover the edge.
“If you don’t watch him,” Mary Fortune shouted above the noise of the
machine, “he’ll cut off some of your dirt!”
“Yonder’s the stob,” the old man yelled. “He hasn’t gone beyond the stob.”
“Not YET he hasn’t,” she roared.
The bulldozer passed beneath them and went on to the far side. “Well you
watch,” he said. “Keep your eyes open and if he knocks that stob, I’ll stop him.
The Pittses are the kind that would let a cow pasture or a mule lot or a row of
beans interfere with progress,” he continued. “The people like you and me with
heads on their shoulders know you can’t stop the marcher time for a cow.…”
“He’s shaking the stob on the other side!” she screamed and before he could
stop her, she had jumped down from the hood and was running along the edge of
the embankment, her little yellow dress billowing out behind.
“Don’t run so near the edge,” he yelled but she had already reached the stob
and was squatting down by it to see how much it had been shaken. She leaned
over the embankment and shook her first at the man on the bulldozer. He waved at
her and went on about his business. More sense in her little finger than all the rest
of that tribe in their heads put together, the old man said to himself, and watched
with pride as she started back to him.
She had a head of thick, very fine, sand-colored hair—the exact kind he had
had when he had had any—that grew straight and was cut just above her eyes and
down the sides of her cheeks to the tips of her ears so that it formed a kind of door
opening onto the central part of her face. Her glasses were silver-rimmed like his
and she even walked the way he did, stomach forward, with a careful abrupt gait,
something between a rock and a shuffle. She was walking so close to the edge of
the embankment that the outside of her right foot was flush with it.
“I said don’t walk so close to the edge,” he called; “you fall off there and you
won’t live to see the day this place gets built up.” He was always very careful to
see that she avoided dangers. He would not allow her to sit in snakey places or
put her hands on bushes that might hide hornets.
She didn’t move an inch. She had a habit of his of not hearing what she didn’t
want to hear and since this was a little trick he had taught her himself, he had to
admire the way she practiced it. He foresaw that in her own old age it would
serve her well. She reached the car and climbed back onto the hood without a
word and put her feet back on his shoulders where she had had them before, as if
he were no more than a part of the automobile. Her attention returned to the far
bulldozer.
“Remember what you won’t get if you don’t mind,” her grandfather remarked.
He was a strict disciplinarian but he had never whipped her. There were some
children, like the first six Pittses, whom he thought should be whipped once a
week on principle, but there were other ways to control intelligent children and he
had never laid a rough hand on Mary Fortune. Furthermore, he had never allowed
her mother or her brothers and sisters so much as to slap her. The elder Pitts was
a different matter.
He was a man of a nasty temper and of ugly unreasonable resentments. Time
and again, Mr. Fortune’s heart had pounded to see him rise slowly from his place
at the table—not the head, Mr. Fortune sat there, but from his place at the side—
and abruptly, for no reason, with no explanation, jerk his head at Mary Fortune
and say, “Come with me,” and leave the room, unfastening his belt as he went. A
look that was completely foreign to the child’s face would appear on it. The old
man could not define the look but it infuriated him. It was a look that was part
terror and part respect and part something else, something very like cooperation.
This look would appear on her face and she would get up and follow Pitts out.
They would get in his truck and drive down the road out of earshot, where he
would beat her.
Mr. Fortune knew for a fact that he beat her because he had followed them in
his car and had seen it happen. He had watched from behind a boulder about a
hundred feet away while the child clung to a pine tree and Pitts, as methodically
as if he were whacking a bush with a sling blade, beat her around the ankles with
his belt. All she had done was jump up and down as if she were standing on a hot
stove and make a whimpering noise like a dog that was being peppered. Pitts had
kept at it for about three minutes and then he had turned, without a word, and got
back in his truck and left her there, and she had slid down under the tree and taken
both feet in her hands and rocked back and forth. The old man had crept forward
to catch her. Her face was contorted into a puzzle of small red lumps and her nose
and eyes were running. He sprang on her and sputtered, “Why didn’t you hit him
back? Where’s your spirit? Do you think I’d a let himbeat me?”
She had jumped up and started backing away from him with her jaw stuck out.
“Nobody beat me,” she said.
“Didn’t I see it with my own eyes?” he exploded.
“Nobody is here and nobody beat me,” she said. “Nobody’s ever beat me in
my life and if anybody did, I’d kill him. You can see for yourself nobody is here.”
“Do you call me a liar or a blindman!” he shouted. “I saw him with my own
two eyes and you never did a thing but let him do it, you never did a thing but hang
onto that tree and dance up and down a little and blubber and if it had been me, I’d
a swung my fist in his face and…”
“Nobody was here and nobody beat me and if anybody did I’d kill him!” she
yelled and then turned and dashed off through the woods.
“And I’m a Poland china pig and black is white!” he had roared after her and
he had sat down on a small rock under the tree, disgusted and furious. This was
Pitts’s revenge on him. It was as if it were he that Pitts was driving down the road
to beat and it was as if he were the one submitting to it. He had thought at first that
he could stop him by saying that if he beat her, he would put them off the place but
when he had tried that, Pitts had said, “Put me off and you put her off too. Go right
ahead. She’s mine to whip and I’ll whip her every day of the year if it suits me.”
Anytime he could make Pitts feel his hand he was determined to do it and at
present he had a little scheme up his sleeve that was going to be a considerable
blow to Pitts. He was thinking of it with relish when he told Mary Fortune to
remember what she wouldn’t get if she didn’t mind, and he added, without waiting
for an answer, that he might be selling another lot soon and that if he did, he might
give her a bonus but not if she gave himany sass. He had frequent little verbal tilts
with her but this was a sport like putting a mirror up in front of a rooster and
watching himfight his reflection.
“I don’t want no bonus,” Mary Fortune said.
“I ain’t ever seen you refuse one.”
“You ain’t ever seen me ask for one neither,” she said.
“How much have you laid by?” he asked.
“Noner yer bidnis,” she said and stamped his shoulders with her feet. “Don’t
be buttin into my bidnis.”
“I bet you got it sewed up in your mattress,” he said, “just like an old nigger
woman. You ought to put it in the bank. I’m going to start you an account just as
soon as I complete this deal. Won’t anybody be able to check on it but me and
you.”
The bulldozer moved under them again and drowned out the rest of what he
wanted to say. He waited and when the noise had passed, he could hold it in no
longer. “I’m going to sell the lot right in front of the house for a gas station,” he
said. “Then we won’t have to go down the road to get the car filled up, just step
out the front door.”
The Fortune house was set back about two hundred feet from the road and it
was this two hundred feet that he intended to sell. It was the part that his daughter
airily called “the lawn” though it was nothing but a field of weeds.
“You mean,” Mary Fortune said after a minute, “the lawn?”
“Yes mam!” he said. “I mean the lawn,” and he slapped his knee.
She did not say anything and he turned and looked up at her. There in the little
rectangular opening of hair was his face looking back at him, but it was a
reflection not of his present expression but of the darker one that indicated his
displeasure. “That’s where we play,” she muttered.
“Well there’s plenty of other places you can play,” he said, irked by this lack
of enthusiasm.
“We won’t be able to see the woods across the road,” she said.
The old man stared at her. “The woods across the road?” he repeated.
“We won’t be able to see the view,” she said.
“The view?” he repeated.
“The woods,” she said; “we won’t be able to see the woods fromthe porch.”
“The woods fromthe porch?” he repeated.
Then she said, “My daddy grazes his calves on that lot.”
The old man’s wrath was delayed an instant by shock. Then it exploded in a
roar. He jumped up and turned and slammed his fist on the hood of the car. “He
can graze themsomewheres else!”
“You fall off that embankment and you’ll wish you hadn’t,” she said.
He moved fromin front of the car around to the side, keeping his eye on her all
the time. “Do you think I care where he grazes his calves! Do you think I’ll let a
calf interfere with my bidnis? Do you think I give a damn hoot where that fool
grazes his calves?”
She sat, her red face darker than her hair, exactly reflecting his expression
now. “He who calls his brother a fool is subject to hell fire,” she said.
“Jedge not,” he shouted, “lest ye be not jedged!” The tinge of his face was a
shade more purple than hers. “You!” he said. “You let him beat you any time he
wants to and don’t do a thing but blubber a little and jump up and down!”
“He nor nobody else has ever touched me,” she said, measuring off each word
in a deadly flat tone. “Nobody’s ever put a hand on me and if anybody did, I’d kill
him.”
“And black is white,” the old man piped, “and night is day!”
The bulldozer passed below them. With their faces about a foot apart, each
held the same expression until the noise had receded. Then the old man said,
“Walk home by yourself. I refuse to ride a Jezebel!”
“And I refuse to ride with the Whore of Babylon,” she said and slid off the
other side of the car and started off through the pasture.
“A whore is a woman!” he roared. “That’s how much you know!” But she did
not deign to turn around and answer him back, and as he watched the small robust
figure stalk across the yellow-dotted field toward the woods, his pride in her, as
if it couldn’t help itself, returned like the gentle little tide on the new lake—all
except that part of it that had to do with her refusal to stand up to Pitts; that pulled
back like an undertow. If he could have taught her to stand up to Pitts the way she
stood up to him, she would have been a perfect child, as fearless and sturdyminded
as anyone could want; but it was her one failure of character. It was the
one point on which she did not resemble him. He turned and looked away over the
lake to the woods across it and told himself that in five years, instead of woods,
there would be houses and stores and parking places, and that the credit for it
could go largely to him.
He meant to teach the child spirit by example and since he had definitely made
up his mind, he announced that noon at the dinner table that he was negotiating
with a man named Tilman to sell the lot in front of the house for a gas station.
His daughter, sitting with her worn-out air at the foot of the table, let out a
moan as if a dull knife were being turned slowly in her chest. “You mean the
lawn!” she moaned and fell back in her chair and repeated in an almost inaudible
voice, “He means the lawn.”
The other six Pitts children began to bawl and pipe, “Where we play!” “Don’t
let him do that, Pa!” “We won’t be able to see the road!” and similar idiocies.
Mary Fortune did not say anything. She had a mulish reserved look as if she were
planning some business of her own. Pitts had stopped eating and was staring in
front of him. His plate was full but his fists sat motionless like two dark quartz
stones on either side of it. His eyes began to move from child to child around the
table as if he were hunting for one particular one of them. Finally they stopped on
Mary Fortune sitting next to her grandfather. “You done this to us,” he muttered.
“I didn’t,” she said but there was no assurance in her voice. It was only a
quaver, the voice of a frightened child.
Pitts got up and said, “Come with me,” and turned and walked out, loosening
his belt as he went, and to the old man’s complete despair, she slid away from the
table and followed him, almost ran after him, out the door and into the truck
behind him, and they drove off.
This cowardice affected Mr. Fortune as if it were his own. It made him
physically sick. “He beats an innocent child,” he said to his daughter, who was
apparently still prostrate at the end of the table, “and not one of you lifts a hand to
stop him.”
“You ain’t lifted yours neither,” one of the boys said in an undertone and there
was a general mutter fromthat chorus of frogs.
“I’man old man with a heart condition,” he said. “I can’t stop an ox.”
“She put you up to it,” his daughter murmured in a languid listless tone, her
head rolling back and forth on the rim of her chair. “She puts you up to
everything.”
“No child never put me up to nothing!” he yelled. “You’re no kind of a mother!
You’re a disgrace! That child is an angel! A saint!” he shouted in a voice so high
that it broke and he had to scurry out of the room.
The rest of the afternoon he had to lie on his bed. His heart, whenever he knew
the child had been beaten, felt as if it were slightly too large for the space that was
supposed to hold it. But now he was more determined than ever to see the filling
station go up in front of the house, and if it gave Pitts a stroke, so much the better.
If it gave him a stroke and paralyzed him, he would be served right and he would
never be able to beat her again.
Mary Fortune was never angry with him for long, or seriously, and though he
did not see her the rest of that day, when he woke up the next morning, she was
sitting astride his chest ordering him to make haste so that they would not miss the
concrete mixer.
The workmen were laying the foundation for the fishing club when they
arrived and the concrete mixer was already in operation. It was about the size and
color of a circus elephant; they stood and watched it churn for a half-hour or so.
At eleven-thirty, the old man had an appointment with Tilman to discuss his
transaction and they had to leave. He did not tell Mary Fortune where they were
going but only that he had to see a man.
Tilman operated a combination country store, filling station, scrap-metal
dump, used-car lot and dance hall five miles down the highway that connected
with the dirt road that passed in front of the Fortune place. Since the dirt road
would soon be paved, he wanted a good location on it for another such enterprise.
He was an up-and-coming man—the kind, Mr. Fortune thought, who was never
just in line with progress but always a little ahead of it so that he could be there to
meet it when it arrived. Signs up and down the highway announced that Tilman’s
was only five miles away, only four, only three, only two, only one; “Watch out
for Tilman’s, Around this bend!” and finally, “Here it is, Friends, T ILMAN’S!” in
dazzling red letters.
Tilman’s was bordered on either side by a field of old used-car bodies, a kind
of ward for incurable automobiles. He also sold outdoor ornaments, such as stone
cranes and chickens, urns, jardinieres, whirligigs, and farther back from the road,
so as not to depress his dance-hall customers, a line of tombstones and
monuments. Most of his businesses went on out-of-doors, so that his store building
itself had not involved excessive expense. It was a one-room wooden structure
onto which he had added, behind, a long tin hall equipped for dancing. This was
divided into two sections, Colored and White, each with its private nickelodeon.
He had a barbecue pit and sold barbecued sandwiches and soft drinks.
As they drove up under the shed of Tilman’s place, the old man glanced at the
child sitting with her feet drawn up on the seat and her chin resting on her knees.
He didn’t know if she would remember that it was Tilman he was going to sell the
lot to or not.
“What you going in here for?” she asked suddenly, with a sniffing look as if
she scented an enemy.
“Noner yer bidnis,” he said. “You just sit in the car and when I come out, I’ll
bring you something.”
“Don’tcher bring me nothing,” she said darkly, “because I won’t be here.”
“Haw!” he said. “Now you’re here, it’s nothing for you to do but wait,” and he
got out and without paying her any further attention, he entered the dark store
where Tilman was waiting for him.
When he came out in half an hour, she was not in the car. Hiding, he decided.
He started walking around the store to see if she was in the back. He looked in the
doors of the two sections of the dance hall and walked on around by the
tombstones. Then his eye roved over the field of sinking automobiles and he
realized that she could be in or behind any one of two hundred of them. He came
back out in front of the store. A Negro boy, drinking a purple drink, was sitting on
the ground with his back against the sweating ice cooler.
“Where did that little girl go to, boy?” he asked.
“I ain’t seen nair little girl,” the boy said.
The old man irritably fished in his pocket and handed him a nickel and said,
“A pretty little girl in a yeller cotton dress.”
“If you speakin about a stout chile look lak you,” the boy said, “she gone off in
a truck with a white man.”
“What kind of a truck, what kind of a white man?” he yelled.
“It were a green pick-up truck,” the boy said smacking his lips, “and a white
man she call ‘daddy.’ They gone thataway some time ago.”
The old man, trembling, got in his car and started home. His feelings raced
back and forth between fury and mortification. She had never left him before and
certainly never for Pitts. Pitts had ordered her to get in the truck and she was
afraid not to. But when he reached this conclusion he was more furious than ever.
What was the matter with her that she couldn’t stand up to Pitts? Why was there
this one flaw in her character when he had trained her so well in everything else?
It was an ugly mystery.
When he reached the house and climbed the front steps, there she was sitting in
the swing, looking glum-faced in front of her across the field he was going to sell.
Her eyes were puffy and pink-rimmed but he didn’t see any red marks on her legs.
He sat down in the swing beside her. He meant to make his voice severe but
instead it came out crushed, as if it belonged to a suitor trying to reinstate himself.
“What did you leave me for? You ain’t ever left me before,” he said.
“Because I wanted to,” she said, looking straight ahead.
“You never wanted to,” he said. “He made you.”
“I toljer I was going and I went,” she said in a slow emphatic voice, not
looking at him, “and now you can go on and lemme alone.” There was something
very final, in the sound of this, a tone that had not come up before in their disputes.
She stared across the lot where there was nothing but a profusion of pink and
yellow and purple weeds, and on across the red road, to the sullen line of black
pine woods fringed on top with green. Behind that line was a narrow gray-blue
line of more distant woods and beyond that nothing but the sky, entirely blank
except for one or two threadbare clouds. She looked into this scene as if it were a
person that she preferred to him.
“It’s my lot, ain’t it?” he asked. “Why are you so up-in-the-air about me
selling my own lot?”
“Because it’s the lawn,” she said. Her nose and eyes began to run horribly but
she held her face rigid and licked the water off as soon as it was in reach of her
tongue. “We won’t be able to see across the road,” she said.
The old man looked across the road to assure himself again that there was
nothing over there to see. “I never have seen you act in such a way before,” he
said in an incredulous voice. “There’s not a thing over there but the woods.”
“We won’t be able to see ’um,” she said, “and that’s the lawn and my daddy
grazes his calves on it.”
At that the old man stood up. “You act more like a Pitts than a Fortune,” he
said. He had never made such an ugly remark to her before and he was sorry the
instant he had said it. It hurt him more than it did her. He turned and went in the
house and upstairs to his room.
Several times during the afternoon, he got up from his bed and looked out the
window across the “lawn” to the line of woods she said they wouldn’t be able to
see any more. Every time he saw the same thing: woods—not a mountain, not a
waterfall, not any kind of planted bush or flower, just woods. The sunlight was
woven through them at that particular time of the afternoon so that every thin pine
trunk stood out in all its nakedness. A pine trunk is a pine trunk, he said to himself,
and anybody that wants to see one don’t have to go far in this neighborhood. Every
time he got up and looked out, he was reconvinced of his wisdom in selling the
lot. The dissatisfaction it caused Pitts would be permanent, but he could make it
up to Mary Fortune by buying her something. With grown people, a road led either
to heaven or hell, but with children there were always stops along the way where
their attention could be turned with a trifle.
The third time he got up to look at the woods, it was almost six o’clock and the
gaunt trunks appeared to be raised in a pool of red light that gushed from the
almost hidden sun setting behind them. The old man stared for some time, as if for
a prolonged instant he were caught up out of the rattle of everything that led to the
future and were held there in the midst of an uncomfortable mystery that he had not
apprehended before. He saw it, in his hallucination, as if someone were wounded
behind the woods and the trees were bathed in blood. After a few minutes this
unpleasant vision was broken by the presence of Pitts’s pick-up truck grinding to a
halt below the window. He returned to his bed and shut his eyes and against the
closed lids hellish red trunks rose up in a black wood.
At the supper table nobody addressed a word to him, including Mary Fortune.
He ate quickly and returned again to his roomand spent the evening pointing out to
himself the advantages for the future of having an establishment like Tilman’s so
near. They would not have to go any distance for gas. Anytime they needed a loaf
of bread, all they would have to do would be step out their front door into
Tilman’s back door. They could sell milk to Tilman. Tilman was a likable fellow.
Tilman would draw other business. The road would soon be paved. Travelers
from all over the country would stop at Tilman’s. If his daughter thought she was
better than Tilman, it would be well to take her down a little. All men were
created free and equal. When this phrase sounded in his head, his patriotic sense
triumphed and he realized that it was his duty to sell the lot, that he must insure the
future. He looked out the window at the moon shining over the woods across the
road and listened for a while to the hum of crickets and treefrogs, and beneath
their racket, he could hear the throb of the future town of Fortune.
He went to bed certain that just as usual, he would wake up in the morning
looking into a little red mirror framed in a door of fine hair. She would have
forgotten all about the sale and after breakfast they would drive into town and get
the legal papers from the courthouse. On the way back he would stop at Tilman’s
and close the deal.
When he opened his eyes in the morning, he opened them on the empty ceiling.
He pulled himself up and looked around the room but she was not there. He hung
over the edge of the bed and looked beneath it but she was not there either. He got
up and dressed and went outside. She was sitting in the swing on the front porch,
exactly the way she had been yesterday, looking across the lawn into the woods.
The old man was very much irritated. Every morning since she had been able to
climb, he had waked up to find her either on his bed or underneath it. It was
apparent that this morning she preferred the sight of the woods. He decided to
ignore her behavior for the present and then bring it up later when she was over
her pique. He sat down in the swing beside her but she continued to look at the
woods. “I thought you and me’d go into town and have us a look at the boats in the
new boat store,” he said.
She didn’t turn her head but she asked suspiciously, in a loud voice. “What
else are you going for?”
“Nothing else,” he said.
After a pause she said, “If that’s all, I’ll go,” but she did not bother to look at
him.
“Well put on your shoes,” he said. “I ain’t going to the city with a barefoot
woman.” She did not bother to laugh at this joke.
The weather was as indifferent as her disposition. The sky did not look as if it
were going to rain or as if it were not going to rain. It was an unpleasant gray and
the sun had not troubled to come out. All the way into town, she sat looking at her
feet, which stuck out in front of her, encased in heavy brown school shoes. The
old man had often sneaked up on her and found her alone in conversation with her
feet and he thought she was speaking with them silently now. Every now and then
her lips moved but she said nothing to him and let all his remarks pass as if she
had not heard them. He decided it was going to cost him considerable to buy her
good humor again and that he had better do it with a boat, since he wanted one too.
She had been talking boats ever since the water backed up onto his place. They
went first to the boat store. “Show us the yachts for po’ folks!” he shouted jovially
to the clerk as they entered.
“They’re all for po’ folks!” the clerk said. “You’ll be po’ when you finish
buying one!” He was a stout youth in a yellow shirt and blue pants and he had a
ready wit. They exchanged several clever remarks in rapid-fire succession. Mr.
Fortune looked at Mary Fortune to see if her face had brightened. She stood
staring absently over the side of an outboard motor boat at the opposite wall.
“Ain’t the lady innerested in boats?” the clerk asked.
She turned and wandered back out onto the sidewalk and got in the car again.
The old man looked after her with amazement. He could not believe that a child of
her intelligence could be acting this way over the mere sale of a field. “I think she
must be coming down with something,” he said. “We’ll come back again,” and he
returned to the car.
“Let’s go get us an ice-creamcone,” he suggested, looking at her with concern.
“I don’t want no ice-creamcone,” she said.
His actual destination was the courthouse but he did not want to make this
apparent. “How’d you like to visit the ten-cent store while I tend to a little bidnis
of mine?” he asked. “You can buy yourself something with a quarter I brought
along.”
“I ain’t got nothing to do in no ten-cent store,” she said. “I don’t want no
quarter of yours.”
If a boat was of no interest, he should not have thought a quarter would be and
reproved himself for that stupidity. “Well what’s the matter, sister?” he asked
kindly. “Don’t you feel good?”
She turned and looked him straight in the face and said with a slow
concentrated ferocity, “It’s the lawn. My daddy grazes his calves there. We won’t
be able to see the woods any more.”
The old man had held his fury in as long as he could. “He beats you!” he
shouted. “And you worry about where he’s going to graze his calves!”
“Nobody’s ever beat me in my life,” she said, “and if anybody did, I’d kill
him.”
A man seventy-nine years of age cannot let himself be run over by a child of
nine. His face set in a look that was just as determined as hers. “Are you a
Fortune,” he said, “or are you a Pitts? Make up your mind.”
Her voice was loud and positive and belligerent. “I’m Mary—Fortune—
Pitts,” she said.
“Well I,” he shouted, “amPURE Fortune!”
There was nothing she could say to this and she showed it. For an instant she
looked completely defeated, and the old man saw with a disturbing clearness that
this was the Pitts look. What he saw was the Pitts look, pure and simple, and he
felt personally stained by it, as if it had been found on his own face. He turned in
disgust and backed the car out and drove straight to the courthouse.
The courthouse was a red and white blaze-faced building set in the center of a
square from which most of the grass had been worn off. He parked in front of it
and said, “Stay here,” in an imperious tone and got out and slammed the car door.
It took him a half-hour to get the deed and have the sale paper drawn up and
when he returned to the car, she was sitting on the back seat in the corner. The
expression on that part of her face that he could see was foreboding and
withdrawn. The sky had darkened also and there was a hot sluggish tide in the air,
the kind felt when a tornado is possible.
“We better get on before we get caught in a storm,” he said and emphatically,
“because I got one more place to stop at on the way home,” but he might have been
chauffeuring a small dead body for all the answer he got.
* * *
On the way to Tilman’s he reviewed once more the many just reasons that were
leading him to his present action and he could not locate a flaw in any of them. He
decided that while this attitude of hers would not be permanent, he was
permanently disappointed in her and that when she came around she would have to
apologize; and that there would be no boat. He was coming to realize slowly that
his trouble with her had always been that he had not shown enough firmness. He
had been too generous. He was so occupied with these thoughts that he did not
notice the signs that said how many miles to Tilman’s until the last one exploded
joyfully in his face: “Here it is, Friends, TILMAN’S!” He pulled in under the shed.
He got out without so much as looking at Mary Fortune and entered the dark
store where Tilman, leaning on the counter in front of a triple shelf of canned
goods, was waiting for him.
Tilman was a man of quick action and few words. He sat habitually with his
arms folded on the counter and his insignificant head weaving snake-fashion
above them. He had a triangular-shaped face with the point at the bottom and the
top of his skull was covered with a cap of freckles. His eyes were green and very
narrow and his tongue was always exposed in his partly opened mouth. He had his
checkbook handy and they got down to business at once. It did not take him long to
look at the deed and sign the bill of sale. Then Mr. Fortune signed it and they
grasped hands over the counter.
Mr. Fortune’s sense of relief as he grasped Tilman’s hand was extreme. What
was done, he felt, was done and there could be no more argument, with her or
with himself. He felt that he had acted on principle and that the future was assured.
Just as their hands loosened, an instant’s change came over Tilman’s face and
he disappeared completely under the counter as if he had been snatched by the feet
frombelow. A bottle crashed against the line of tinned goods behind where he had
been. The old man whirled around. Mary Fortune was in the door, red-faced and
wild-looking, with another bottle lifted to hurl. As he ducked, it broke behind him
on the counter and she grabbed another from the crate. He sprang at her but she
tore to the other side of the store, screaming something unintelligible and throwing
everything within her reach. The old man pounced again and this time he caught
her by the tail of her dress and pulled her backward out of the store. Then he got a
better grip and lifted her, wheezing and whimpering but suddenly limp in his arms,
the few feet to the car. He managed to get the door open and dump her inside.
Then he ran around to the other side and got in himself and drove away as fast as
he could.
His heart felt as if it were the size of the car and was racing forward, carrying
himto some inevitable destination faster than he had ever been carried before. For
the first five minutes he did not think but only sped forward as if he were being
driven inside his own fury. Gradually the power of thought returned to him. Mary
Fortune, rolled into a ball in the corner of the seat, was snuffling and heaving.
He had never seen a child behave in such a way in his life. Neither his own
children nor anyone else’s had ever displayed such temper in his presence, and he
had never for an instant imagined that the child he had trained himself, the child
who had been his constant companion for nine years, would embarrass him like
this. The child he had never lifted a hand to!
Then he saw, with the sudden vision that sometimes comes with delayed
recognition, that that had been his mistake.
She respected Pitts because, even with no just cause, he beat her; and if he—
with his just cause—did not beat her now, he would have nobody to blame but
himself if she turned out a hellion. He saw that the time had come, that he could no
longer avoid whipping her, and as he turned off the highway onto the dirt road
leading to home, he told himself that when he finished with her, she would never
throw another bottle again.
He raced along the clay road until he came to the line where his own property
began and then he turned off onto a side path, just wide enough for the automobile
and bounced for a half a mile through the woods. He stopped the car at the exact
spot where he had seen Pitts take his belt to her. It was a place where the road
widened so that two cars could pass or one could turn around, an ugly red bald
spot surrounded by long thin pines that appeared to be gathered there to witness
anything that would take place in such a clearing. A few stones protruded from the
clay.
“Get out,” he said and reached across her and opened the door.
She got out without looking at himor asking what they were going to do and he
got out on his side and came around the front of the car.
“Now I’m going to whip you!” he said and his voice was extra loud and
hollow and had a vibrating quality that appeared to be taken up and passed
through the tops of the pines. He did not want to get caught in a downpour while
he was whipping her and he said, “Hurry up and get ready against that tree,” and
began to take off his belt.
What he had in mind to do appeared to come very slowly as if it had to
penetrate a fog in her head. She did not move but gradually her confused
expression began to clear. Where a few seconds before her face had been red and
distorted and unorganized, it drained now of every vague line until nothing was
left on it but positiveness, a look that went slowly past determination and reached
certainty. “Nobody has ever beat me,” she said, “and if anybody tries it, I’ll kill
him.”
“I don’t want no sass,” he said and started toward her. His knees felt very
unsteady, as if they might turn either backward or forward.
She moved exactly one step back and, keeping her eye on him steadily,
removed her glasses and dropped them behind a small rock near the tree he had
told her to get ready against. “Take off your glasses,” she said.
“Don’t give me orders!” he said in a high voice and slapped awkwardly at her
ankles with his belt.
She was on him so quickly that he could not have recalled which blow he felt
first, whether the weight of her whole solid body or the jabs of her feet or the
pummeling of her fist on his chest. He flailed the belt in the air, not knowing
where to hit but trying to get her off him until he could decide where to get a grip
on her.
“Leggo!” he shouted. “Leggo I tell you!” But she seemed to be everywhere,
coming at him from all directions at once. It was as if he were being attacked not
by one child but by a pack of small demons all with stout brown school shoes and
small rocklike fists. His glasses flew to the side.
“I toljer to take themoff,” she growled without pausing.
He caught his knee and danced on one foot and a rain of blows fell on his
stomach. He felt five claws in the flesh of his upper arm where she was hanging
from while her feet mechanically battered his knees and her free fist pounded him
again and again in the chest. Then with horror he saw her face rise up in front of
his, teeth exposed, and he roared like a bull as she bit the side of his jaw. He
seemed to see his own face coming to bite him from several sides at once but he
could not attend to it for he was being kicked indiscriminately, in the stomach and
then in the crotch. Suddenly he threw himself on the ground and began to roll like
a man on fire. She was on top of him at once, rolling with him and still kicking,
and now with both fists free to batter his chest.
“I’m an old man!” he piped. “Leave me alone!” But she did not stop. She
began a fresh assault on his jaw.
“Stop stop!” he wheezed. “I’myour grandfather!”
She paused, her face exactly on top of his. Pale identical eye looked into pale
identical eye. “Have you had enough?” she asked.
The old man looked up into his own image. It was triumphant and hostile.
“You been whipped,” it said, “by me,” and then it added, bearing down on each
word, “and I’mPURE Pitts.”
In the pause she loosened her grip and he got hold of her throat. With a sudden
surge of strength, he managed to roll over and reverse their positions so that he
was looking down into the face that was his own but had dared to call itself Pitts.
With his hands still tight around her neck, he lifted her head and brought it down
once hard against the rock that happened to be under it. Then he brought it down
twice more. Then looking into the face in which the eyes, slowly rolling back,
appeared to pay him not the slightest attention, he said, “There’s not an ounce of
Pitts in me.”
He continued to stare at his conquered image until he perceived that though it
was absolutely silent, there was no look of remorse on it. The eyes had rolled
back down and were set in a fixed glare that did not take him in. “This ought to
teach you a good lesson,” he said in a voice that was edged with doubt.
He managed painfully to get up on his unsteady kicked legs and to take two
steps, but the enlargement of his heart which had begun in the car was still going
on. He turned his head and looked behind him for a long time at the little
motionless figure with its head on the rock.
Then he fell on his back and looked up helplessly along the bare trunks into the
tops of the pines and his heart expanded once more with a convulsive motion. It
expanded so fast that the old man felt as if he were being pulled after it through the
woods, felt as if he were running as fast as he could with the ugly pines toward the
lake. He perceived that there would be a little opening there, a little place where
he could escape and leave the woods behind him. He could see it in the distance
already, a little opening where the white sky was reflected in the water. It grew as
he ran toward it until suddenly the whole lake opened up before him, riding
majestically in little corrugated folds toward his feet. He realized suddenly that he
could not swim and that he had not bought the boat. On both sides of him he saw
that the gaunt trees had thickened into mysterious dark files that were marching
across the water and away into the distance. He looked around desperately for
someone to help him but the place was deserted except for one huge yellow
monster which sat to the side, as stationary as he was, gorging itself on clay.