MRS. MAY’S bedroom window was low and faced on the east and the bull,
silvered in the moonlight, stood under it, his head raised as if he listened—like
some patient god come down to woo her—for a stir inside the room. The window
was dark and the sound of her breathing too light to be carried outside. Clouds
crossing the moon blackened him and in the dark he began to tear at the hedge.
Presently they passed and he appeared again in the same spot, chewing steadily,
with a hedge-wreath that he had ripped loose for himself caught in the tips of his
horns. When the moon drifted into retirement again, there was nothing to mark his
place but the sound of steady chewing. Then abruptly a pink glow filled the
window. Bars of light slid across him as the venetian blind was slit. He took a
step backward and lowered his head as if to show the wreath across his horns.
For almost a minute there was no sound from inside, then as he raised his
crowned head again, a woman’s voice, guttural as if addressed to a dog, said,
“Get away fromhere, Sir!” and in a second muttered, “Some nigger’s scrub bull.”
The animal pawed the ground and Mrs. May, standing bent forward behind the
blind, closed it quickly lest the light make him charge into the shrubbery. For a
second she waited, still bent forward, her nightgown hanging loosely from her
narrow shoulders. Green rubber curlers sprouted neatly over her forehead and her
face beneath them was smooth as concrete with an egg-white paste that drew the
wrinkles out while she slept.
She had been conscious in her sleep of a steady rhythmic chewing as if
something were eating one wall of the house. She had been aware that whatever it
was had been eating as long as she had had the place and had eaten everything
from the beginning of her fence line up to the house and now was eating the house
and calmly with the same steady rhythm would continue through the house, eating
her and the boys, and then on, eating everything but the Greenleafs, on and on,
eating everything until nothing was left but the Greenleafs on a little island all
their own in the middle of what had been her place. When the munching reached
her elbow, she jumped up and found herself, fully awake, standing in the middle of
her room. She identified the sound at once: a cow was tearing at the shrubbery
under her window. Mr. Greenleaf had left the lane gate open and she didn’t doubt
that the entire herd was on her lawn. She turned on the dim pink table lamp and
then went to the window and slit the blind. The bull, gaunt and long-legged, was
standing about four feet fromher, chewing calmly like an uncouth country suitor.
For fifteen years, she thought as she squinted at him fiercely, she had been
having shiftless people’s hogs root up her oats, their mules wallow on her lawn,
their scrub bulls breed her cows. If this one was not put up now, he would be over
the fence, ruining her herd before morning—and Mr. Greenleaf was soundly
sleeping a half mile down the road in the tenant house. There was no way to get
him unless she dressed and got in her car and rode down there and woke him up.
He would come but his expression, his whole figure, his every pause, would say:
“Hit looks to me like one or both of them boys would not make their maw ride out
in the middle of the night thisaway. If hit was my boys, they would have got thet
bull up theirself.”
The bull lowered his head and shook it and the wreath slipped down to the
base of his horns where it looked like a menacing prickly crown. She had closed
the blind then; in a few seconds she heard himmove off heavily.
Mr. Greenleaf would say, “If hit was my boys they would never have allowed
their maw to go after hired help in the middle of the night. They would have did it
theirself.”
Weighing it, she decided not to bother Mr. Greenleaf. She returned to bed
thinking that if the Greenleaf boys had risen in the world it was because she had
given their father employment when no one else would have him. She had had Mr.
Greenleaf fifteen years but no one else would have had him five minutes. Just the
way he approached an object was enough to tell anybody with eyes what kind of a
worker he was. He walked with a high-shouldered creep and he never appeared
to come directly forward. He walked on the perimeter of some invisible circle
and if you wanted to look him in the face, you had to move and get in front of him.
She had not fired him because she had always doubted she could do better. He
was too shiftless to go out and look for another job; he didn’t have the initiative to
steal, and after she had told him three or four times to do a thing, he did it; but he
never told her about a sick cow until it was too late to call the veterinarian and if
her barn had caught on fire, he would have called his wife to see the flames before
he began to put them out. And of the wife, she didn’t even like to think. Beside the
wife, Mr. Greenleaf was an aristocrat.
“If it had been my boys,” he would have said, “they would have cut off their
right armbefore they would have allowed their maw to.…”
“If your boys had any pride, Mr. Greenleaf,” she would like to say to him
some day, “there are many things that they would not allow their mother to do.”
* * *
The next morning as soon as Mr. Greenleaf came to the back door, she told him
there was a stray bull on the place and that she wanted himpenned up at once.
“Done already been here three days,” he said, addressing his right foot which
he held forward, turned slightly as if he were trying to look at the sole. He was
standing at the bottom of the three back steps while she leaned out the kitchen
door, a small woman with pale near-sighted eyes and gray hair that rose on top
like the crest of some disturbed bird.
“Three days!” she said in the restrained screech that had become habitual with
her.
Mr. Greenleaf, looking into the distance over the near pasture, removed a
package of cigarettes from his shirt pocket and let one fall into his hand. He put
the package back and stood for a while looking at the cigarette. “I put him in the
bull pen but he torn out of there,” he said presently. “I didn’t see him none after
that.” He bent over the cigarette and lit it and then turned his head briefly in her
direction. The upper part of his face sloped gradually into the lower which was
long and narrow, shaped like a rough chalice. He had deep-set fox-colored eyes
shadowed under a gray felt hat that he wore slanted forward following the line of
his nose. His build was insignificant.
“Mr. Greenleaf,” she said, “get that bull up this morning before you do
anything else. You know he’ll ruin the breeding schedule. Get him up and keep
him up and the next time there’s a stray bull on this place, tell me at once. Do you
understand?”
“Where you want himput at?” Mr. Greenleaf asked.
“I don’t care where you put him,” she said. “You are supposed to have some
sense. Put himwhere he can’t get out. Whose bull is he?”
For a moment Mr. Greenleaf seemed to hesitate between silence and speech.
He studied the air to the left of him. “He must be somebody’s bull,” he said after a
while.
“Yes, he must!” she said and shut the door with a precise little slam.
She went into the dining room where the two boys were eating breakfast and
sat down on the edge of her chair at the head of the table. She never ate breakfast
but she sat with them to see that they had what they wanted. “Honestly!” she said,
and began to tell about the bull, aping Mr. Greenleaf saying, “It must be
somebody’s bull.”
Wesley continued to read the newspaper folded beside his plate but Scofield
interrupted his eating from time to time to look at her and laugh. The two boys
never had the same reaction to anything. They were as different, she said, as night
and day. The only thing they did have in common was that neither of them cared
what happened on the place. Scofield was a business type and Wesley was an
intellectual.
Wesley, the younger child, had had rheumatic fever when he was seven and
Mrs. May thought that this was what had caused him to be an intellectual.
Scofield, who had never had a day’s sickness in his life, was an insurance
salesman. She would not have minded his selling insurance if he had sold a nicer
kind but he sold the kind that only Negroes buy. He was what Negroes call a
“policy man.” He said there was more money in nigger-insurance than any other
kind, and before company, he was very loud about it. He would shout, “Mamma
don’t like to hear me say it but I’m the best nigger-insurance salesman in this
county!”
Scofield was thirty-six and he had a broad pleasant smiling face but he was
not married. “Yes,” Mrs. May would say, “and if you sold decent insurance, some
nice girl would be willing to marry you. What nice girl wants to marry a niggerinsurance
man? You’ll wake up some day and it’ll be too late.”
And at this Scofield would yodel and say, “Why Mamma, I’m not going to
marry until you’re dead and gone and then I’m going to marry me some nice fat
farmgirl that can take over this place!” And once he had added,”—some nice lady
like Mrs. Greenleaf.” When he had said this, Mrs. May had risen from her chair,
her back stiff as a rake handle, and had gone to her room. There she had sat down
on the edge of her bed for some time with her small face drawn. Finally she had
whispered, “I work and slave, I struggle and sweat to keep this place for them and
soon as I’m dead, they’ll marry trash and bring it in here and ruin everything.
They’ll marry trash and ruin everything I’ve done,” and she had made up her mind
at that moment to change her will. The next day she had gone to her lawyer and
had had the property entailed so that if they married, they could not leave it to
their wives.
The idea that one of them might marry a woman even remotely like Mrs.
Greenleaf was enough to make her ill. She had put up with Mr. Greenleaf for
fifteen years, but the only way she had endured his wife had been by keeping
entirely out of her sight. Mrs. Greenleaf was large and loose. The yard around her
house looked like a dump and her five girls were always filthy; even the youngest
one dipped snuff. Instead of making a garden or washing their clothes, her
preoccupation was what she called “prayer healing.”
Every day she cut all the morbid stories out of the newspaper—the accounts of
women who had been raped and criminals who had escaped and children who had
been burned and of train wrecks and plane crashes and the divorces of movie
stars. She took these to the woods and dug a hole and buried themand then she fell
on the ground over them and mumbled and groaned for an hour or so moving her
huge arms back and forth under her and out again and finally just lying down flat
and, Mrs. May suspected, going to sleep in the dirt.
She had not found out about this until the Greenleafs had been with her a few
months. One morning she had been out to inspect a field that she had wanted
planted in rye but that had come up in clover because Mr. Greenleaf had used the
wrong seeds in the grain drill. She was returning through a wooded path that
separated two pastures, muttering to herself and hitting the ground methodically
with a long stick she carried in case she saw a snake. “Mr. Greenleaf,” she was
saying in a low voice, “I cannot afford to pay for your mistakes. I am a poor
woman and this place is all I have. I have two boys to educate. I cannot.…”
Out of nowhere a guttural agonized voice groaned, “Jesus! Jesus!” In a second
it came again with a terrible urgency. “Jesus! Jesus!”
Mrs. May stopped still, one hand lifted to her throat. The sound was so
piercing that she felt as it some violent unleashed force had broken out of the
ground and was charging toward her. Her second thought was more reasonable:
somebody had been hurt on the place and would sue her for everything she had.
She had no insurance. She rushed forward and turning a bend in the path, she saw
Mrs. Greenleaf sprawled on her hands and knees off the side of the road, her head
down.
“Mrs. Greenleaf!” she shrilled, “what’s happened?”
Mrs. Greenleaf raised her head. Her face was a patchwork of dirt and tears
and her small eyes, the color of two field peas, were red-rimmed and swollen, but
her expression was as composed as a bulldog’s. She swayed back and forth on her
hands and knees and groaned, “Jesus, Jesus.”
Mrs. May winced. She thought the word, Jesus, should be kept inside the
church building like other words inside the bedroom. She was a good Christian
woman with a large respect for religion, though she did not, of course, believe any
of it was true. “What is the matter with you?” she asked sharply.
“You broken my healing,” Mrs. Greenleaf said, waving her aside. “I can’t talk
to you until I finish.”
Mrs. May stood, bent forward, her mouth open and her stick raised off the
ground as if she were not sure what she wanted to strike with it.
“Oh Jesus, stab me in the heart!” Mrs. Greenleaf shrieked. “Jesus, stab me in
the heart!” and she fell back flat in the dirt, a huge human mound, her legs and
arms spread out as if she were trying to wrap themaround the earth.
Mrs. May felt as furious and helpless as if she had been insulted by a child.
“Jesus,” she said, drawing herself back, “would be ashamed of you. He would
tell you to get up from there this instant and go wash your children’s clothes!” and
she had turned and walked off as fast as she could.
Whenever she thought of how the Greenleaf boys had advanced in the world,
she had only to think of Mrs. Greenleaf sprawled obscenely on the ground, and say
to herself, “Well, no matter how far they go, they came fromthat.”
She would like to have been able to put in her will that when she died, Wesley
and Scofield were not to continue to employ Mr. Greenleaf. She was capable of
handling Mr. Greenleaf; they were not. Mr. Greenleaf had pointed out to her once
that her boys didn’t know hay fromsilage. She had pointed out to himthat they had
other talents, that Scofield was a successful business man and Wesley a successful
intellectual. Mr. Greenleaf did not comment, but he never lost an opportunity of
letting her see by his expression or some simple gesture, that he held the two of
them in infinite contempt. As scrub-human as the Greenleafs were, he never
hesitated to let her know that in any like circumstance in which his own boys
might have been involved, they—O. T. and E. T. Greenleaf—would have acted to
better advantage.
The Greenleaf boys were two or three years younger than the May boys. They
were twins and you never knew when you spoke to one of them whether you were
speaking to O.T. or E.T, and they never had the politeness to enlighten you. They
were long-legged and raw-boned and red-skinned, with bright grasping foxcolored
eyes like their father’s. Mr. Greenleaf’s pride in them began with the fact
that they were twins. He acted, Mrs. May said, as if this were something smart
they had thought of themselves. They were energetic and hard-working and she
would admit to anyone that they had come a long way—and that the Second World
War was responsible for it.
They had both joined the service and, disguised in their uniforms, they could
not be told from other people’s children. You could tell, of course, when they
opened their mouths but they did that seldom. The smartest thing they had done
was to get sent overseas and there to marry French wives. They hadn’t married
French trash either. They had married nice girls who naturally couldn’t tell that
they murdered the king’s English or that the Greenleafs were who they were.
Wesley’s heart condition had not permitted him to serve his country but
Scofield had been in the army for two years. He had not cared for it and at the end
of his military service, he was only a Private First Class. The Greenleaf boys
were both some kind of sergeants, and Mr. Greenleaf, in those days, had never
lost an opportunity of referring to them by their rank. They had both managed to
get wounded and now they both had pensions. Further, as soon as they were
released from the army, they took advantage of all the benefits and went to the
school of agriculture at the university—the taxpayers meanwhile supporting their
French wives. The two of them were living now about two miles down the
highway on a piece of land that the government had helped them to buy and in a
brick duplex bungalow that the government had helped to build and pay for. If the
war had made anyone, Mrs. May said, it had made the Greenleaf boys. They each
had three little children apiece, who spoke Greenleaf English and French, and
who, on account of their mothers’ background, would be sent to the convent
school and brought up with manners. “And in twenty years,” Mrs. May asked
Scofield and Wesley, “do you know what those people will be?
“Society,” she said blackly.
She had spent fifteen years coping with Mr. Greenleaf and, by now, handling
himhad become second nature with her. His disposition on any particular day was
as much a factor in what she could and couldn’t do as the weather was, and she
had learned to read his face the way real country people read the sunrise and
sunset.
She was a country woman only by persuasion. The late Mr. May, a business
man, had bought the place when land was down, and when he died it was all he
had to leave her. The boys had not been happy to move to the country to a brokendown
farm, but there was nothing else for her to do. She had the timber on the
place cut and with the proceeds had set herself up in the dairy business after Mr.
Greenleaf had answered her ad. “i seen yor add and i will come have 2 boys,”
was all his letter said, but he arrived the next day in a pieced-together truck, his
wife and five daughters sitting on the floor in back, himself and the two boys in the
cab.
Over the years they had been on her place, Mr. and Mrs. Greenleaf had aged
hardly at all. They had no worries, no responsibilities. They lived like the lilies of
the field, off the fat that she struggled to put into the land. When she was dead and
gone from overwork and worry, the Greenleafs, healthy and thriving, would be
just ready to begin draining Scofield and Wesley.
Wesley said the reason Mrs. Greenleaf had not aged was because she released
all her emotions in prayer healing. “You ought to start praying, Sweetheart,” he
had said in the voice that, poor boy, he could not help making deliberately nasty.
Scofield only exasperated her beyond endurance but Wesley caused her real
anxiety. He was thin and nervous and bald and being an intellectual was a terrible
strain on his disposition. She doubted if he would marry until she died but she was
certain that then the wrong woman would get him. Nice girls didn’t like Scofield
but Wesley didn’t like nice girls. He didn’t like anything. He drove twenty miles
every day to the university where he taught and twenty miles back every night, but
he said he hated the twenty-mile drive and he hated the second-rate university and
he hated the morons who attended it. He hated the country and he hated the life he
lived; he hated living with his mother and his idiot brother and he hated hearing
about the damn dairy and the damn help and the damn broken machinery. But in
spite of all he said, he never made any move to leave. He talked about Paris and
Rome but he never went even to Atlanta.
“You’d go to those places and you’d get sick,” Mrs. May would say. “Who in
Paris is going to see that you get a salt-free diet? And do you think if you married
one of those odd numbers you take out that she would cook a salt-free diet for
you? No indeed, she would not!” When she took this line, Wesley would turn
himself roughly around in his chair and ignore her. Once when she had kept it up
too long, he had snarled, “Well, why don’t you do something practical, Woman?
Why don’t you pray for me like Mrs. Greenleaf would?”
“I don’t like to hear you boys make jokes about religion,” she had said. “If you
would go to church, you would meet some nice girls.”
But it was impossible to tell them anything. When she looked at the two of
them now, sitting on either side of the table, neither one caring the least if a stray
bull ruined her herd—which was their herd, their future—when she looked at the
two of them, one hunched over a paper and the other teetering back in his chair,
grinning at her like an idiot, she wanted to jump up and beat her fist on the table
and shout, “You’ll find out one of these days, you’ll find out what Reality is when
it’s too late!”
“Mamma,” Scofield said, “don’t you get excited now but I’ll tell you whose
bull that is.” He was looking at her wickedly. He let his chair drop forward and
he got up. Then with his shoulders bent and his hands held up to cover his head, he
tiptoed to the door. He backed into the hall and pulled the door almost to so that it
hid all of himbut his face. “You want to know, Sugarpie?” he asked.
Mrs. May sat looking at himcoldly.
“That’s O.T. and E.T.’s bull,” he said. “I collected from their nigger yesterday
and he told me they were missing it,” and he showed her an exaggerated expanse
of teeth and disappeared silently.
Wesley looked up and laughed.
Mrs. May turned her head forward again, her expression unaltered. “I am the
only adult on this place,” she said. She leaned across the table and pulled the
paper from the side of his plate. “Do you see how it’s going to be when I die and
you boys have to handle him?” she began. “Do you see why he didn’t know whose
bull that was? Because it was theirs. Do you see what I have to put up with? Do
you see that if I hadn’t kept my foot on his neck all these years, you boys might be
milking cows every morning at four o’clock?”
Wesley pulled the paper back toward his plate and staring at her full in the
face, he murmured, “I wouldn’t milk a cow to save your soul fromhell.”
“I know you wouldn’t,” she said in a brittle voice. She sat back and began
rapidly turning her knife over at the side of her plate. “O.T. and E.T. are fine
boys,” she said. “They ought to have been my sons.” The thought of this was so
horrible that her vision of Wesley was blurred at once by a wall of tears. All she
saw was his dark shape, rising quickly from the table. “And you two,” she cried,
“you two should have belonged to that woman!”
He was heading for the door.
“When I die,” she said in a thin voice, “I don’t know what’s going to become
of you.”
“You’re always yapping about when-you-die,” he growled as he rushed out,
“but you look pretty healthy to me.”
For some time she sat where she was, looking straight ahead through the
window across the room into a scene of indistinct grays and greens. She stretched
her face and her neck muscles and drew in a long breath but the scene in front of
her flowed together anyway into a watery gray mass. “They needn’t think I’m
going to die any time soon,” she muttered, and some more defiant voice in her
added: I’ll die when I get good and ready.
She wiped her eyes with the table napkin and got up and went to the window
and gazed at the scene in front of her. The cows were grazing on two pale green
pastures across the road and behind them, fencing them in, was a black wall of
trees with a sharp sawtooth edge that held off the indifferent sky. The pastures
were enough to calm her. When she looked out any window in her house, she saw
the reflection of her own character. Her city friends said she was the most
remarkable woman they knew, to go, practically penniless and with no
experience, out to a rundown farm and make a success of it. “Everything is against
you,” she would say, “the weather is against you and the dirt is against you and the
help is against you. They’re all in league against you. There’s nothing for it but an
iron hand!”
“Look at Mamma’s iron hand!” Scofield would yell and grab her arm and hold
it up so that her delicate blue-veined little hand would dangle from her wrist like
the head of a broken lily. The company always laughed.
The sun, moving over the black and white grazing cows, was just a little
brighter than the rest of the sky. Looking down, she saw a darker shape that might
have been its shadow cast at an angle, moving among them. She uttered a sharp cry
and turned and marched out of the house.
Mr. Greenleaf was in the trench silo, filling a wheelbarrow. She stood on the
edge and looked down at him. “I told you to get up that bull. Now he’s in with the
milk herd.”
“You can’t do two thangs at oncet,” Mr. Greenleaf remarked.
“I told you to do that first.”
He wheeled the barrow out of the open end of the trench toward the barn and
she followed close behind him. “And you needn’t think, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said,
“that I don’t know exactly whose bull that is or why you haven’t been in any hurry
to notify me he was here. I might as well feed O.T. and E.T.’s bull as long as I’m
going to have himhere ruining my herd.”
Mr. Greenleaf paused with the wheelbarrow and looked behind him. “Is that
themboys’ bull?” he asked in an incredulous tone.
She did not say a word. She merely looked away with her mouth taut.
“They told me their bull was out but I never known that was him,” he said.
“I want that bull put up now,” she said, “and I’m going to drive over to O.T.
and E.T.’s and tell them they’ll have to come get him today. I ought to charge for
the time he’s been here—then it wouldn’t happen again.”
“They didn’t pay but seventy-five dollars for him,” Mr. Greenleaf offered.
“I wouldn’t have had himas a gift,” she said.
“They was just going to beef him,” Mr. Greenleaf went on, “but he got loose
and run his head into their pickup truck. He don’t like cars and trucks. They had a
time getting his horn out the fender and when they finally got himloose, he took off
and they was too tired to run after him—but I never known that was himthere.”
“It wouldn’t have paid you to know, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said. “But you know
now. Get a horse and get him.”
In a half hour, from her front window she saw the bull, squirrel-colored, with
jutting hips and long light horns, ambling down the dirt road that ran in front of the
house. Mr. Greenleaf was behind him on the horse. “That’s a Greenleaf bull if I
ever saw one,” she muttered. She went out on the porch and called, “Put him
where he can’t get out.”
“He likes to bust loose,” Mr. Greenleaf said, looking with approval at the
bull’s rump. “This gentleman is a sport.”
“If those boys don’t come for him, he’s going to be a dead sport,” she said.
“I’mjust warning you.”
He heard her but he didn’t answer.
“That’s the awfullest looking bull I ever saw,” she called but he was too far
down the road to hear.
* * *
It was mid-morning when she turned into O.T. and E.T.’s driveway. The house, a
new red-brick, low-to-the-ground building that looked like a warehouse with
windows, was on top of a treeless hill. The sun was beating down directly on the
white roof of it. It was the kind of house that everybody built now and nothing
marked it as belonging to Greenleafs except three dogs, part hound and part spitz,
that rushed out from behind it as soon as she stopped her car. She reminded
herself that you could always tell the class of people by the class of dog, and
honked her horn. While she sat waiting for someone to come, she continued to
study the house. All the windows were down and she wondered if the government
could have air-conditioned the thing. No one came and she honked again.
Presently a door opened and several children appeared in it and stood looking at
her, making no move to come forward. She recognized this as a true Greenleaf
trait—they could hang in a door, looking at you for hours.
“Can’t one of you children come here?” she called.
After a minute they all began to move forward, slowly. They had on overalls
and were barefooted but they were not as dirty as she might have expected. There
were two or three that looked distinctly like Greenleafs; the others not so much so.
The smallest child was a girl with untidy black hair. They stopped about six feet
fromthe automobile and stood looking at her.
“You’re mighty pretty,” Mrs. May said, addressing herself to the smallest girl.
There was no answer. They appeared to share one dispassionate expression
between them.
“Where’s your Mamma?” she asked.
There was no answer to this for some time. Then one of them said something
in French. Mrs. May did not speak French.
“Where’s your daddy?” she asked.
After a while, one of the boys said, “He ain’t hyar neither.”
“Ahhhh,” May said as if something had been proven. “Where’s the colored
man?”
She waited and decided no one was going to answer. “The cat has six little
tongues,” she said. “How would you like to come home with me and let me teach
you how to talk?” She laughed and her laugh died on the silent air. She felt as if
she were on trial for her life, facing a jury of Greenleafs. “I’ll go down and see if
I can find the colored man,” she said.
“You can go if you want to,” one of the boys said.
“Well, thank you,” she murmured and drove off.
The barn was down the lane from the house. She had not seen it before but Mr.
Greenleaf had described it in detail for it had been built according to the latest
specifications. It was a milking parlor arrangement where the cows are milked
from below. The milk ran in pipes from the machines to the milk house and was
never carried in no bucket, Mr. Greenleaf said, by no human hand. “When you
gonter get you one?” he had asked.
“Mr. Greenleaf,” she had said, “I have to do for myself. I am not assisted hand
and foot by the government. It would cost me $20,000 to install a milking parlor. I
barely make ends meet as it is.”
“My boys done it,” Mr. Greenleaf had murmured, and then—“but all boys ain’t
alike.”
“No indeed!” she had said. “I thank God for that!”
“I thank Gawd for ever-thang,” Mr. Greenleaf had drawled.
You might as well, she had thought in the fierce silence that followed; you’ve
never done anything for yourself.
She stopped by the side of the barn and honked but no one appeared. For
several minutes she sat in the car, observing the various machines parked around,
wondering how many of them were paid for. They had a forage harvester and a
rotary hay baler. She had those too. She decided that since no one was here, she
would get out and have a look at the milking parlor and see if they kept it clean.
She opened the milking room door and stuck her head in and for the first
second she felt as if she were going to lose her breath. The spotless white
concrete room was filled with sunlight that came from a row of windows headhigh
along both walls. The metal stanchions gleamed ferociously and she had to
squint to be able to look at all. She drew her head out the roomquickly and closed
the door and leaned against it, frowning. The light outside was not so bright but
she was conscious that the sun was directly on top of her head, like a silver bullet
ready to drop into her brain.
A Negro carrying a yellow calf-feed bucket appeared from around the corner
of the machine shed and came toward her. He was a light yellow boy dressed in
the cast-off army clothes of the Greenleaf twins. He stopped at a respectable
distance and set the bucket on the ground.
“Where’s Mr. O.T. and Mr. E.T.?” she asked.
“Mist O.T. he in town, Mist E. T. he off yonder in the field,” the Negro said,
pointing first to the left and then to the right as as if he were naming the position of
two planets.
“Can you remember a message?” she asked, looking as if she thought this
doubtful.
“I’ll remember it if I don’t forget it,” he said with a touch of sullenness.
“Well, I’ll write it down then,” she said. She got in her car and took a stub of
pencil from her pocket book and began to write on the back of an empty envelope.
The Negro came and stood at the window. “I’m Mrs. May,” she said as she wrote.
“Their bull is on my place and I want him off today. You can tell them I’m furious
about it.”
“That bull lef here Sareday,” the Negro said, “and none of us ain’t seen him
since. We ain’t knowed where he was.”
“Well, you know now,” she said, “and you can tell Mr. O.T. and Mr. E.T. that
if they don’t come get him today, I’m going to have their daddy shoot him the first
thing in the morning. I can’t have that bull ruining my herd.” She handed him the
note.
“If I knows Mist O.T. and Mist E.T.,” he said, taking it, “they goin to say you
go ahead on and shoot him. He done busted up one of our trucks already and we
be glad to see the last of him.”
She pulled her head back and gave him a look from slightly bleared eyes. “Do
they expect me to take my time and my worker to shoot their bull?” she asked.
“They don’t want him so they just let him loose and expect somebody else to kill
him? He’s eating my oats and ruining my herd and I’mexpected to shoot himtoo?”
“I speck you is,” he said softly. “He done busted up…”
She gave him a very sharp look and said, “Well, I’m not surprised. That’s just
the way some people are,” and after a second she asked, “Which is boss, Mr. O.T.
or Mr. E.T.?” She had always suspected that they fought between themselves
secretly.
“They never quarls,” the boy said. “They like one man in two skins.”
“Hmp. I expect you just never heard themquarrel.”
“Nor nobody else heard them neither,” he said, looking away as if this
insolence were addressed to someone else.
“Well,” she said, “I haven’t put up with their father for fifteen years not to
know a few things about Greenleafs.”
The Negro looked at her suddenly with a gleam of recognition. “Is you my
policy man’s mother?” he asked.
“I don’t know who your policy man is,” she said sharply. “You give them that
note and tell them if they don’t come for that bull today, they’ll be making their
father shoot it tomorrow,” and she drove off.
She stayed at home all afternoon waiting for the Greenleaf twins to come for
the bull. They did not come. I might as well be working for them, she thought
furiously. They are simply going to use me to the limit. At the supper table, she
went over it again for the boys’ benefit because she wanted them to see exactly
what O.T. and E.T. would do. “They don’t want that bull,” she said, “—pass the
butter—so they simply turn him loose and let somebody else worry about getting
rid of him for them. How do you like that? I’m the victim. I’ve always been the
victim.”
“Pass the butter to the victim,” Wesley said. He was in a worse humor than
usual because he had had a flat tire on the way home fromthe university.
Scofield handed her the butter and said, “Why Mamma, ain’t you ashamed to
shoot an old bull that ain’t done nothing but give you a little scrub strain in your
herd? I declare,” he said, “with the Mamma I got it’s a wonder I turned out to be
such a nice boy!”
“You ain’t her boy, Son,” Wesley said.
She eased back in her chair, her fingertips on the edge of the table.
“All I know is,” Scofield said, “I done mighty well to be as nice as I am
seeing what I come from.”
When they teased her they spoke Greenleaf English but Wesley made his own
particular tone come through it like a knife edge. “Well lemme tell you one thang,
Brother,” he said, leaning over the table, “that if you had half a mind you would
already know.”
“What’s that, Brother?” Scofield asked, his broad face grinning into the thin
constricted one across fromhim.
“That is,” Wesley said, “that neither you nor me is her boy…,” but he stopped
abruptly as she gave a kind of hoarse wheeze like an old horse lashed
unexpectedly. She reared up and ran fromthe room.
“Oh, for God’s sake,” Wesley growled, “What did you start her off for?”
“I never started her off,” Scofield said. “You started her off.”
“Hah.”
“She’s not as young as she used to be and she can’t take it.”
“She can only give it out,” Wesley said. “I’mthe one that takes it.”
His brother’s pleasant face had changed so that an ugly family resemblance
showed between them. “Nobody feels sorry for a lousy bastard like you,” he said
and grabbed across the table for the other’s shirtfront.
From her room she heard a crash of dishes and she rushed back through the
kitchen into the dining room. The hall door was open and Scofield was going out
of it. Wesley was lying like a large bug on his back with the edge of the
overturned table cutting him across the middle and broken dishes scattered on top
of him. She pulled the table off him and caught his arm to help him rise but he
scrambled up and pushed her off with a furious charge of energy and flung himself
out of the door after his brother.
She would have collapsed but a knock on the back door stiffened her and she
swung around. Across the kitchen and back porch, she could see Mr. Greenleaf
peering eagerly through the screenwire. All her resources returned in full strength
as if she had only needed to be challenged by the devil himself to regain them. “I
heard a thump,” he called, “and I thought the plastering might have fell on you.”
If he had been wanted someone would have had to go on a horse to find him.
She crossed the kitchen and the porch and stood inside the screen and said, “No,
nothing happened but the table turned over. One of the legs was weak,” and
without pausing, “the boys didn’t come for the bull so tomorrow you’ll have to
shoot him.”
The sky was crossed with thin red and purple bars and behind them the sun
was moving down slowly as if it were descending a ladder. Mr. Greenleaf
squatted down on the step, his back to her, the top of his hat on a level with her
feet. “Tomorrow I’ll drive himhome for you,” he said.
“Oh no, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said in a mocking voice, “you drive him home
tomorrow and next week he’ll be back here. I know better than that.” Then in a
mournful tone, she said, “I’m surprised at O.T. and E.T. to treat me this way. I
thought they’d have more gratitude. Those boys spent some mighty happy days on
this place, didn’t they, Mr. Greenleaf?”
Mr. Greenleaf didn’t say anything.
“I think they did,” she said. “I think they did. But they’ve forgotten all the nice
little things I did for them now. If I recall, they wore my boys’ old clothes and
played with my boys’ old toys and hunted with my boys’ old guns. They swam in
my pond and shot my birds and fished in my stream and I never forgot their
birthday and Christmas seemed to roll around very often if I remember it right.
And do they think of any of those things now?” she asked. “NOOOOO,” she said.
For a few seconds she looked at the disappearing sun and Mr. Greenleaf
examined the palms of his hands. Presently as if it had just occurred to her, she
asked, “Do you know the real reason they didn’t come for that bull?”
“Naw I don’t,” Mr. Greenleaf said in a surly voice.
“They didn’t come because I’m a woman,” she said. “You can get away with
anything when you’re dealing with a woman. If there were a man running this
place…”
Quick as a snake striking Mr. Greenleaf said, “You got two boys. They know
you got two men on the place.”
The sun had disappeared behind the tree line. She looked down at the dark
crafty face, upturned now, and at the wary eyes, bright under the shadow of the
hatbrim. She waited long enough for himto see that she was hurt and then she said,
“Some people learn gratitude too late, Mr. Greenleaf, and some never learn it at
all,” and she turned and left himsitting on the steps.
Half the night in her sleep she heard a sound as if some large stone were
grinding a hole on the outside wall of her brain. She was walking on the inside,
over a succession of beautiful rolling hills, planting her stick in front of each step.
She became aware after a time that the noise was the sun trying to burn through the
tree line and she stopped to watch, safe in the knowledge that it couldn’t, that it
had to sink the way it always did outside of her property. When she first stopped it
was a swollen red ball, but as she stood watching it began to narrow and pale
until it looked like a bullet. Then suddenly it burst through the tree line and raced
down the hill toward her. She woke up with her hand over her mouth and the same
noise, diminished but distinct, in her ear. It was the bull munching under her
window. Mr. Greenleaf had let himout.
She got up and made her way to the window in the dark and looked out through
the slit blind, but the bull had moved away from the hedge and at first she didn’t
see him. Then she saw a heavy form some distance away, paused as if observing
her. This is the last night I amgoing to put up with this, she said, and watched until
the iron shadow moved away in the darkness.
The next morning she waited until exactly eleven o’clock. Then she got in her
car and drove to the barn. Mr. Greenleaf was cleaning milk cans. He had seven of
them standing up outside the milk room to get the sun. She had been telling him to
do this for two weeks. “All right, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said, “go get your gun.
We’re going to shoot that bull.”
“I thought you wanted theseyer cans…”
“Go get your gun, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said. Her voice and face were
expressionless.
“That gentleman torn out of there last night,” he murmured in a tone of regret
and bent again to the can he had his armin.
“Go get your gun, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said in the same triumphant toneless
voice. “The bull is in the pasture with the dry cows. I saw him from my upstairs
window. I’m going to drive you up to the field and you can run him into the empty
pasture and shoot himthere.”
He detached himself from the can slowly. “Ain’t nobody ever ast me to shoot
my boys’ own bull!” he said in a high rasping voice. He removed a rag from his
back pocket and began to wipe his hands violently, then his nose.
She turned as if she had not heard this and said, “I’ll wait for you in the car.
Go get your gun.”
She sat in the car and watched him stalk off toward the harness room where he
kept a gun. After he had entered the room, there was a crash as if he had kicked
something out of his way. Presently he emerged again with the gun, circled behind
the car, opened the door violently and threw himself onto the seat beside her. He
held the gun between his knees and looked straight ahead. He’d like to shoot me
instead of the bull, she thought, and turned her face away so that he could not see
her smile.
The morning was dry and clear. She drove through the woods for a quarter of
a mile and then out into the open where there were fields on either side of the
narrow road. The exhilaration of carrying her point had sharpened her senses.
Birds were screaming everywhere, the grass was almost too bright to look at, the
sky was an even piercing blue. “Spring is here!” she had gaily. Mr. Greenleaf
lifted one muscle somewhere near his mouth as if he found this the most asinine
remark ever made. When she stopped at the second pasture gate, he flung himself
out of the car door and slammed it behind him. Then he opened the gate and she
drove through. He closed it and flung himself back in, silently, and she drove
around the rim of the pasture until she spotted the bull, almost in the center of it,
grazing peacefully among the cows.
“The gentleman is waiting on you,” she said and gave Mr. Greenleaf’s furious
profile a sly look. “Run him into that next pasture and when you get him in, I’ll
drive in behind you and shut the gate myself.”
He flung himself out again, this time deliberately leaving the car door open so
that she had to lean across the seat and close it. She sat smiling as she watched
him make his way across the pasture toward the opposite gate. He seemed to
throw himself forward at each step and then pull back as if he were calling on
some power to witness that he was being forced. “Well,” she said aloud as if he
were still in the car, “it’s your own boys who are making you do this, Mr.
Greenleaf.” O.T. and E.T. were probably splitting their sides laughing at himnow.
She could hear their identical nasal voices saying, “Made Daddy shoot our bull
for us. Daddy don’t know no better than to think that’s a fine bull he’s shooting.
Gonna kill Daddy to shoot that bull!”
“If those boys cared a thing about you, Mr. Greenleaf,” she said, “they would
have come for that bull. I’msurprised at them.”
He was circling around to open the gate first. The bull, dark among the spotted
cows, had not moved. He kept his head down, eating constantly. Mr. Greenleaf
opened the gate and then began circling back to approach him from the rear. When
he was about ten feet behind him, he flapped his arms at his sides. The bull lifted
his head indolently and then lowered it again and continued to eat. Mr. Greenleaf
stooped again and picked up something and threw it at him with a vicious swing.
She decided it was a sharp rock for the bull leapt and then began to gallop until he
disappeared over the rimof the hill. Mr. Greenleaf followed at his leisure.
“You needn’t think you’re going to lose him!” she cried and started the car
straight across the pasture. She had to drive slowly over the terraces and when she
reached the gate, Mr. Greenleaf and the bull were nowhere in sight. This pasture
was smaller than the last, a green arena, encircled almost entirely by woods. She
got out and closed the gate and stood looking for some sign of Mr. Greenleaf but
he had disappeared completely. She knew at once that his plan was to lose the
bull in the woods. Eventually, she would see him emerge somewhere from the
circle of trees and come limping toward her and when he finally reached her, he
would say, “If you can find that gentleman in themwoods, you’re better than me.”
She was going to say, “Mr. Greenleaf, if I have to walk into those woods with
you and stay all afternoon, we are going to find that bull and shoot him. You are
going to shoot him if I have to pull the trigger for you.” When he saw she meant
business he would return and shoot the bull quickly himself.
She got back into the car and drove to the center of the pasture where he would
not have so far to walk to reach her when he came out of the woods. At this
moment she could picture him sitting on a stump, marking lines in the ground with
a stick. She decided she would wait exactly ten minutes by her watch. Then she
would begin to honk. She got out of the car and walked around a little and then sat
down on the front bumper to wait and rest. She was very tired and she lay her
head back against the hood and closed her eyes. She did not understand why she
should be so tired when it was only mid-morning. Through her closed eyes, she
could feel the sun, red-hot overhead. She opened her eyes slightly but the white
light forced her to close themagain.
For some time she lay back against the hood, wondering drowsily why she
was so tired. With her eyes closed, she didn’t think of time as divided into days
and nights but into past and future. She decided she was tired because she had
been working continuously for fifteen years. She decided she had every right to be
tired, and to rest for a few minutes before she began working again. Before any
kind of judgement seat, she would be able to say: I’ve worked, I have not
wallowed. At this very instant while she was recalling a lifetime of work, Mr.
Greenleaf was loitering in the woods and Mrs. Greenleaf was probably flat on the
ground, asleep over her holeful of clippings. The woman had got worse over the
years and Mrs. May believed that now she was actually demented. “I’m afraid
your wife has let religion warp her,” she said once tactfully to Mr. Greenleaf.
“Everything in moderation, you know.”
“She cured a man oncet that half his gut was eat out with worms,” Mr.
Greenleaf said, and she had turned away, half-sickened. Poor souls, she thought
now, so simple. For a few seconds she dozed.
When she sat up and looked at her watch, more than ten minutes had passed.
She had not heard any shot. A new thought occurred to her: suppose Mr. Greenleaf
had aroused the bull chunking stones at him and the animal had turned on him and
run him up against a tree and gored him? The irony of it deepened: O.T. and E.T.
would then get a shyster lawyer and sue her. It would be the fitting end to her
fifteen years with the Greenleafs. She thought of it almost with pleasure as if she
had hit on the perfect ending for a story she was telling her friends. Then she
dropped it, for Mr. Greenleaf had a gun with himand she had insurance.
She decided to honk. She got up and reached inside the car window and gave
three sustained honks and two or three shorter ones to let him know she was
getting impatient. Then she went back and sat down on the bumper again.
In a few minutes something emerged from the tree line, a black heavy shadow
that tossed its head several times and then bounded forward. After a second she
saw it was the bull. He was crossing the pasture toward her at a slow gallop, a
gay almost rocking gait as if he were overjoyed to find her again. She looked
beyond him to see if Mr. Greenleaf was coming out of the woods too but he was
not. “Here he is, Mr. Greenleaf!” she called and looked on the other side of the
pasture to see if he could be coming out there but he was not in sight. She looked
back and saw that the bull, his head lowered, was racing toward her. She
remained perfectly still, not in fright, but in a freezing unbelief. She stared at the
violent black streak bounding toward her as if she had no sense of distance, as if
she could not decide at once what his intention was, and the bull had buried his
head in her lap, like a wild tormented lover, before her expression changed. One
of his horns sank until it pierced her heart and the other curved around her side
and held her in an unbreakable grip. She continued to stare straight ahead but the
entire scene in front of her had changed—the tree line was a dark wound in a
world that was nothing but sky—and she had the look of a person whose sight has
been suddenly restored but who finds the light unbearable.
Mr. Greenleaf was running toward her from the side with his gun raised and
she saw him coming though she was not looking in his direction. She saw him
approaching on the outside of some invisible circle, the tree line gaping behind
him and nothing under his feet. He shot the bull four times through the eye. She did
not hear the shots but she felt the quake in the huge body as it sank, pulling her
forward on its head, so that she seemed, when Mr. Greenleaf reached her, to be
bent over whispering some last discovery into the animal’s ear.