ASBURY’S train stopped so that he would get off exactly where his mother was
standing waiting to meet him. Her thin spectacled face below him was bright with
a wide smile that disappeared as she caught sight of him bracing himself behind
the conductor. The smile vanished so suddenly, the shocked look that replaced it
was so complete, that he realized for the first time that he must look as ill as he
was. The sky was a chill gray and a startling white-gold sun, like some strange
potentate from the east, was rising beyond the black woods that surrounded
Timberboro. It cast a strange light over the single block of one-story brick and
wooden shacks. Asbury felt that he was about to witness a majestic
transformation, that the flat of roofs might at any moment turn into the mounting
turrets of some exotic temple for a god he didn’t know. The illusion lasted only a
moment before his attention was drawn back to his mother.
She had given a little cry; she looked aghast. He was pleased that she should
see death in his face at once. His mother, at the age of sixty, was going to be
introduced to reality and he supposed that if the experience didn’t kill her, it
would assist her in the process of growing up. He stepped down and greeted her.
“You don’t look very well,” she said and gave hima long clinical stare.
“I don’t feel like talking,” he said at once. “I’ve had a bad trip.”
Mrs. Fox observed that his left eye was bloodshot. He was puffy and pale and
his hair had receded tragically for a boy of twenty-five. The thin reddish wedge of
it left on top bore down in a point that seemed to lengthen his nose and give himan
irritable expression that matched his tone of voice when he spoke to her. “It must
have been cold up there,” she said. “Why don’t you take off your coat? It’s not
cold down here.”
“You don’t have to tell me what the temperature is!” he said in a high voice.
“I’m old enough to know when I want to take my coat off!” The train glided
silently away behind him, leaving a view of the twin blocks of dilapidated stores.
He gazed after the aluminum speck disappearing into the woods. It seemed to him
that his last connection with a larger world were vanishing forever. Then he
turned and faced his mother grimly, irked that he had allowed himself, even for an
instant, to see an imaginary temple in this collapsing country junction. He had
become entirely accustomed to the thought of death, but he had not become
accustomed to the thought of death here.
He had felt the end coming on for nearly four months. Alone in his freezing
flat, huddled under his two blankets and his overcoat and with three thicknesses of
the New York Times between, he had had a chill one night, followed by a violent
sweat that left the sheets soaking and removed all doubt from his mind about his
true condition. Before this there had been a gradual slackening of his energy and
vague inconsistent aches and headaches. He had been absent so many days from
his part-time job in the bookstore that he had lost it. Since then he had been living,
or just barely so, on his savings and these, diminishing day by day, had been all he
had between himand home. Now there was nothing. He was here.
“Where’s the car?” he muttered.
“It’s over yonder,” his mother said. “And your sister is asleep in the back
because I don’t like to come out this early by myself. There’s no need to wake her
up.”
“No,” he said, “let sleeping dogs lie,” and he picked up his two bulging
suitcases and started across the road with them.
They were too heavy for him and by the time he reached the car, his mother
saw that he was exhausted. He had never come home with two suitcases before.
Ever since he had first gone away to college, he had come back every time with
nothing but the necessities for a two-week stay and with a wooden resigned
expression that said he was prepared to endure the visit for exactly fourteen days.
“You’ve brought more than usual,” she observed, but he did not answer.
He opened the car door and hoisted the two bags in beside his sister’s
upturned feet, giving first the feet—in Girl Scout shoes—and then the rest of her a
revolted look of recognition. She was packed into a black suit and had a white rag
around her head with metal curlers sticking out from under the edges. Her eyes
were closed and her mouth open. He and she had the same features except that
hers were bigger. She was eight years older than he was and was principal of the
county elementary school. He shut the door softly so she wouldn’t wake up and
then went around and got in the front seat and closed his eyes. His mother backed
the car into the road and in a few minutes he felt it swerve into the highway. Then
he opened his eyes. The road stretched between two open fields of yellow
bitterweed.
“Do you think Timberboro has improved?” his mother asked. This was her
standard question, meant to be taken literally.
“It’s still there, isn’t it?” he said in an ugly voice.
“Two of the stores have new fronts,” she said. Then with a sudden ferocity,
she said, “You did well to come home where you can get a good doctor! I’ll take
you to Doctor Block this afternoon.”
“I am not,” he said, trying to keep his voice from shaking, “going to Doctor
Block. This afternoon or ever. Don’t you think if I’d wanted to go to a doctor I’d
have gone up there where they have some good ones? Don’t you know they have
better doctors in New York?”
“He would take a personal interest in you,” she said. “None of those doctors
up there would take a personal interest in you.”
“I don’t want himtaking a personal interest in me.” Then after a minute, staring
out across a blurred purple-looking field, he said, “What’s wrong with me is way
beyond Block,” and his voice trailed off into a frayed sound, almost a sob.
He could not, as his friend Goetz had recommended, prepare to see it all as
illusion, either what had gone before or the few weeks that were left to him. Goetz
was certain that death was nothing at all. Goetz, whose whole face had always
been purple-splotched with a million indignations, had returned from six months
in Japan as dirty as ever but as bland as the Buddha himself. Goetz took the news
of Asbury’s approaching end with a calm indifference. Quoting something or other
he said, “Although the Bodhisattva leads an infinite number of creatures into
nirvana, in reality there are neither any Bodhisattvas to do the leading nor any
creatures to be led.” However, out of some feeling for his welfare, Goetz had put
forth $4.50 to take him to a lecture on Vedanta. It had been a waste of his money.
While Goetz had listened enthralled to the dark little man on the platform,
Asbury’s bored gaze had roved among the audience. It had passed over the heads
of several girls in saris, past a Japanese youth, a blue-black man with a fez, and
several girls who looked like secretaries. Finally, at end of the row, it had rested
on a lean spectacled figure in black, a priest. The priest’s expression was of a
polite but strictly reserved interest. Asbury identified his own feelings
immediately in the taciturn superior expression. When the lecture was over a few
students met in Goetz’s flat, the priest among them, but he was equally reserved.
He listened with a marked politeness to the discussion of Asbury’s approaching
death, but he said little. A girl in a sari remarked that self-fulfillment was out of
the question since it meant salvation and the word was meaningless. “Salvation,”
quoted Goetz, “is the destruction of a simple prejudice, and no one is saved.”
“And what do you say to that?” Asbury asked the priest and returned his
reserved smile over the heads of the others. The borders of this smile seemed to
touch on some icy clarity.
“There is,” the priest said, “a real probability of the New Man, assisted, of
course,” he added brittlely, “by the Third Person of the Trinity.”
“Ridiculous!” the girl in the sari said, but the priest only brushed her with his
smile, which was slightly amused now.
When he got up to leave, he silently handed Asbury a small card on which he
had written his name, Ignatius Vogle, S.J., and an address. Perhaps, Asbury
thought now, he should have used it for the priest appealed to him as a man of the
world, someone who would have understood the unique tragedy of his death, a
death whose meaning had been far beyond the twittering group around them. And
how much more beyond Block. “What’s wrong with me,” he repeated, “is way
beyond Block.”
His mother knew at once what he meant: he meant he was going to have a
nervous breakdown. She did not say a word. She did not say that this was
precisely what she could have told himwould happen. When people think they are
smart—even when they are smart—there is nothing anybody else can say to make
them see things straight, and with Asbury, the trouble was that in addition to being
smart, he had an artistic temperament. She did not know where he had got it from
because his father, who was a lawyer and businessman and farmer and politician
all rolled into one, had certainly had his feet on the ground; and she had certainly
always had hers on it. She had managed after he died to get the two of them
through college and beyond; but she had observed that the more education they got,
the less they could do. Their father had gone to a one-room schoolhouse through
the eighth grade and he could do anything.
She could have told Asbury what would help him. She could have said, “If you
would get out in the sunshine, or if you would work for a month in the dairy, you’d
be a different person!” but she knew exactly how that suggestion would be
received. He would be a nuisance in the dairy but she would let him work in there
if he wanted to. She had let him work in there last year when he had come home
and was writing the play. He had been writing a play about Negroes (why
anybody would want to write a play about Negroes was beyond her) and he had
said he wanted to work in the dairy with them and find out what their interests
were. Their interests were in doing as little as they could get by with, as she could
have told him if anybody could have told him anything. The Negroes had put up
with him and he had learned to put the milkers on and once he had washed all the
cans and she thought that once he had mixed feed. Then a cow had kicked him and
he had not gone back to the barn again. She knew that if he would get in there now,
or get out and fix fences, or do any kind of work—real work, not writing—that he
might avoid this nervous breakdown. “Whatever happened to that play you were
writing about the Negroes?” she asked.
“I am not writing plays,” he said. “And get this through your head: I am not
working in any dairy. I am not getting out in the sunshine. I’m ill. I have fever and
chills and I’mdizzy and all I want you to do is to leave me alone.”
“Then if you are really ill, you should see Doctor Block.”
“And I am not seeing Block,” he finished and ground himself down in the seat
and stared intensely in front of him.
She turned into their driveway, a red road that ran for a quarter of a mile
through the two front pastures. The dry cows were on one side and the milk herd
on the other. She slowed the car and then stopped altogether, her attention caught
by a cow with a bad quarter. “They haven’t been attending to her,” she said.
“Look at that bag!”
Asbury turned his head abruptly in the opposite direction, but there a small,
walleyed Guernsey was watching him steadily as if she sensed some bond
between them. “Good God!” he cried in an agonized voice, “can’t we go on? It’s
six o’clock in the morning!”
“Yes yes,” his mother said and started the car quickly.
“What’s that cry of deadly pain?” his sister drawled from the back seat. “Oh
it’s you,” she said. “Well well, we have the artist with us again. How utterly
utterly.” She had a decidedly nasal voice.
He didn’t answer her or turn his head. He had learned that much. Never
answer her.
“Mary George!” his mother said sharply. “Asbury is sick. Leave himalone.”
“What’s wrong with him?” Mary George asked.
“There’s the house!” his mother said as if they were all blind but her. It rose
on the crest of the hill—a white two-story farmhouse with a wide porch and
pleasant columns. She always approached it with a feeling of pride and she had
said more than once to Asbury, “You have a home here that half those people up
there would give their eyeteeth for!”
She had been once to the terrible place he lived in New York. They had gone
up five flights of dark stone steps, past open garbage cans on every landing, to
arrive finally at two damp rooms and a closet with a toilet in it. “You wouldn’t
live like this at home,” she had muttered.
“No!” he’d said with an ecstatic look, “it wouldn’t be possible!”
She supposed the truth was that she simply didn’t understand how it felt to be
sensitive or how peculiar you were when you were an artist. His sister said he
was not an artist and that he had no talent and that that was the trouble with him;
but Mary George was not a happy girl herself. Asbury said she posed as an
intellectual but that her I.Q. couldn’t be over seventy-five, that all she was really
interested in was getting a man but that no sensible man would finish a first look at
her. She had tried to tell him that Mary George could be very attractive when she
put her mind to it and he had said that that much strain on her mind would break
her down. If she were in any way attractive, he had said, she wouldn’t now be
principal of a county elementary school, and Mary George had said that if Asbury
had had any talent, he would by now have published something. What had he ever
published, she wanted to know, and for that matter, what had he ever written?
Mrs. Fox had pointed out that he was only twenty-five years old and Mary
George had said that the age most people published something at was twenty-one,
which made him exactly four years overdue. Mrs. Fox was not up on things like
that but she suggested that he might be writing a very long book. Very long book,
her eye, Mary George said, he would do well if he came up with so much as a
poem. Mrs. Fox hoped it wasn’t going to be just a poem.
She pulled the car into the side drive and a scattering of guineas exploded into
the air and sailed screaming around the house. “Home again, home again jiggity
jig!” she said.
“Oh God,” Asbury groaned.
“The artist arrives at the gas chamber,” Mary George said in her nasal voice.
He leaned on the door and got out, and forgetting his bags he moved toward
the front of the house as if he were in a daze. His sister got out and stood by the
car door, squinting at his bent unsteady figure. As she watched him go up the front
steps, her mouth fell slack in her astonished face. “Why,” she said, “there is
something the matter with him. He looks a hundred years old.”
“Didn’t I tell you so?” her mother hissed. “Now you keep your mouth shut and
let himalone.”
He went into the house, pausing in the hall only long enough to see his pale
broken face glare at him for an instant from the pier mirror. Holding onto the
banister, he pulled himself up the steep stairs, across the landing and then up the
shorter second flight and into his room, a large open airy room with a faded blue
rug and white curtains freshly put up for his arrival. He looked at nothing, but fell
face down on his own bed. It was a narrow antique bed with a high ornamental
headboard on which was carved a garlanded basket overflowing with wooden
fruit.
While he was still in New York, he had written a letter to his mother which
filled two notebooks. He did not mean it to be read until after his death. It was
such a letter as Kafka had addressed to his father. Asbury’s father had died twenty
years ago and Asbury considered this a great blessing. The old man, he felt sure,
had been one of the courthouse gang, a rural worthy with a dirty finger in every
pie and he knew he would not have been able to stomach him. He had read some
of his correspondence and had been appalled by its stupidity.
He knew, of course, that his mother would not understand the letter at once.
Her literal mind would require some time to discover the significance of it, but he
thought she would be able to see that he forgave her for all she had done to him.
For that matter, he supposed that she would realize what she had done to him only
through the letter. He didn’t think she was conscious of it at all. Her selfsatisfaction
itself was barely conscious, but because of the letter, she might
experience a painful realization and this would be the only thing of value he had to
leave her.
If reading it would be painful to her, writing it had sometimes been unbearable
to him—for in order to face her, he had had to face himself. “I came here to
escape the slave’s atmosphere of home,” he had written, “to find freedom, to
liberate my imagination, to take it like a hawk fromits cage and set it ‘whirling off
into the widening gyre’ (Yeats) and what did I find? It was incapable of flight. It
was some bird you had domesticated, sitting huffy in its pen, refusing to come
out!” The next words were underscored twice. “I have no imagination. I have no
talent. I can’t create. I have nothing but the desire for these things. Why didn’t you
kill that too? Woman, why did you pinion me?”
Writing this, he had reached the pit of despair and he thought that reading it,
she would at least begin to sense his tragedy and her part in it. It was not that she
had ever forced her way on him. That had never been necessary. Her way had
simply been the air he breathed and when at last he had found other air, he
couldn’t survive in it. He felt that even if she didn’t understand at once, the letter
would leave her with an enduring chill and perhaps in time lead her to see herself
as she was.
He had destroyed everything else he had ever written—his two lifeless
novels, his half-dozen stationary plays, his prosy poems, his sketchy short stories
—and kept only the two notebooks that contained the letter. They were in the
black suitcase that his sister, huffing and blowing, was now dragging up the
second flight of stairs. His mother was carrying the smaller bag and came on
ahead. He turned over as she entered the room.
“I’ll open this and get out your things,” she said, “and you can go right to bed
and in a few minutes I’ll bring your breakfast.”
He sat up and said in a fretful voice, “I don’t want any breakfast and I can
open my own suitcase. Leave that alone.”
His sister arrived in the door, her face full of curiosity, and let the black bag
fall with a thud over the doorsill. Then she began to push it across the room with
her foot until she was close enough to get a good look at him. “If I looked as bad
as you do,” she said, “I’d go to the hospital.”
Her mother cut her eyes sharply at her and she left. Then Mrs. Fox closed the
door and came to the bed and sat down on it beside him. “Now this time I want
you to make a long visit and rest,” she said.
“This visit,” he said, “will be permanent.”
“Wonderful!” she cried. “You can have a little studio in your room and in the
mornings you can write plays and in the afternoons you can help in the dairy!”
He turned a white wooden face to her. “Close the blinds and let me sleep,” he
said.
When she was gone, he lay for some time staring at the water stains on the gray
walls. Descending from the top molding, long icicle shapes had been etched by
leaks and, directly over his bed on the ceiling, another leak had made a fierce bird
with spread wings. It had an icicle crosswise in its beak and there were smaller
icicles depending from its wings and tail. It had been there since his childhood
and had always irritated him and sometimes had frightened him. He had often had
the illusion that it was in motion and about to descend mysteriously and set the
icicle on his head. He closed his eyes and thought: I won’t have to look at it for
many more days. And presently he went to sleep.
* * *
When he woke up in the afternoon, there was a pink open-mouthed face hanging
over him and from two large familiar ears on either side of it the black tubes of
Block’s stethoscope extended down to his exposed chest. The doctor, seeing he
was awake, made a face like a Chinaman, rolled his eyes almost out of his head
and cried, “Say AHHHH!”
Block was irresistible to children. For miles around they vomited and went
into fevers to have a visit from him. Mrs. Fox was standing behind him, smiling
radiantly. “Here’s Doctor Block!” she said as if she had captured this angel on the
rooftop and brought himin for her little boy.
“Get him out of here,” Asbury muttered. He looked at the asinine face from
what seemed the bottomof a black hole.
The doctor peered closer, wiggling his ears. Block was bald and had a round
face as senseless as a baby’s. Nothing about him indicated intelligence except two
cold clinical nickel-colored eyes that hung with a motionless curiosity over
whatever he looked at. “You sho do look bad, Azzberry,” he murmured. He took
the stethoscope off and dropped it in his bag. “I don’t know when I’ve seen
anybody your age look as sorry as you do. What you been doing to yourself?”
There was a continuous thud in the back of Asbury’s head as if his heart had
got trapped in it and was fighting to get out. “I didn’t send for you,” he said.
Block put his hand on the glaring face and pulled the eyelid down and peered
into it. “You must have been on the bum up there,” he said. He began to press his
hand in the small of Asbury’s back. “I went up there once myself,” he said, “and
saw exactly how little they had and came straight on back home. Open your
mouth.”
Asbury opened it automatically and the drill-like gaze swung over it and bore
down. He snapped it shut and in a wheezing breathless voice he said, “If I’d
wanted a doctor, I’d have stayed up there where I could have got a good one!”
“Asbury!” his mother said.
“How long you been having the so’ throat?” Block asked.
“She sent for you!” Asbury said. “She can answer the questions.”
“Asbury!” his mother said.
Block leaned over his bag and pulled out a rubber tube. He pushed Asbury’s
sleeve up and tied the tube around his upper arm. Then he took out a syringe and
prepared to find the vein, humming a hymn as he pressed the needle in. Asbury lay
with a rigid outraged stare while the privacy of his blood was invaded by this
idiot. “Slowly Lord but sure,” Block sang in a murmuring voice, “Oh slowly Lord
but sure.” When the syringe was full, he withdrew the needle. “Blood don’t lie,”
he said. He poured it in a bottle and stopped it up and put the bottle in his bag.
“Azzbury,” he started, “how long…”
Asbury sat up and thrust his thudding head forward and said, “I didn’t send for
you. I’m not answering any questions. You’re not my doctor. What’s wrong with
me is way beyond you.”
“Most things are beyond me,” Block said. “I ain’t found anything yet that I
thoroughly understood,” and he sighed and got up. His eyes seemed to glitter at
Asbury as if froma great distance.
“He wouldn’t act so ugly,” Mrs. Fox explained, “if he weren’t really sick. And
I want you to come back every day until you get himwell.”
Asbury’s eyes were a fierce glaring violet. “What’s wrong with me is way
beyond you,” he repeated and lay back down and closed his eyes until Block and
his mother were gone.
* * *
In the next few days, though he grew rapidly worse, his mind functioned with a
terrible clarity. On the point of death, he found himself existing in a state of
illumination that was totally out of keeping with the kind of talk he had to listen to
from his mother. This was largely about cows with names like Daisy and Bessie
Button and their intimate functions—their mastitis and their screw-worms and
their abortions. His mother insisted that in the middle of the day he get out and sit
on the porch and “enjoy the view” and as resistance was too much of a struggle,
he dragged himself out and sat there in a rigid slouch, his feet wrapped in an
afghan and his hands gripped on the chair arms as if he were about to spring
forward into the glaring china blue sky. The lawn extended for a quarter of an acre
down to a barbed-wire fence that divided it from the front pasture. In the middle
of the day the dry cows rested there under a line of sweetgum trees. On the other
side of the road were two hills with a pond between and his mother could sit on
the porch and watch the herd walk across the dam to the hill on the other side. The
whole scene was rimmed by a wall of trees which, at the time of day he was
forced to sit there, was a washed-out blue that reminded himsadly of the Negroes’
faded overalls.
He listened irritably while his mother detailed the faults of the help. “Those
two are not stupid,” she said. “They know how to look out for themselves.”
“They need to,” he muttered, but there was no use to argue with her. Last year
he had been writing a play about the Negro and he had wanted to be around them
for a while to see how they really felt about their condition, but the two who
worked for her had lost all their initiative over the years. They didn’t talk. The
one called Morgan was light brown, part Indian; the other, older one, Randall,
was very black and fat. When they said anything to him, it was as if they were
speaking to an invisible body located to the right or left of where he actually was,
and after two days working side by side with them, he felt he had not established
rapport. He decided to try something bolder than talk and one afternoon as he was
standing near Randall, watching him adjust a milker, he had quietly taken out his
cigarettes and lit one. The Negro had stopped what he was doing and watched
him. He waited until Asbury had taken two draws and then he said, “She don’t
’low no smoking in here.”
The other one approached and stood there, grinning.
“I know it,” Asbury said and after a deliberate pause, he shook the package
and held it out, first to Randall, who took one, and then to Morgan, who took one.
He had then lit the cigarettes for themhimself and the three of themhad stood there
smoking. There were no sounds but the steady click of the two milking machines
and the occasional slap of a cow’s tail against her side. It was one of those
moments of communion when the difference between black and white is absorbed
into nothing.
The next day two cans of milk had been returned from the creamery because it
had absorbed the odor of tobacco. He took the blame and told his mother that it
was he and not the Negroes who had been smoking. “If you were doing it, they
were doing it,” she had said. “Don’t you think I know those two?” She was
incapable of thinking them innocent; but the experience had so exhilarated him that
he had been determined to repeat it in some other way.
The next afternoon when he and Randall were in the milk house pouring the
fresh milk into the cans, he had picked up the jelly glass the Negroes drank out of
and, inspired, had poured himself a glassful of the warm milk and drained it
down. Randall had stopped pouring and had remained, half-bent, over the can,
watching him. “She don’t ’low that,” he said. “That the thing she don’t ’low.”
Asbury poured out another glassful and handed it to him.
“She don’t ’low it,” he repeated.
“Listen,” Asbury said hoarsely, “the world is changing. There’s no reason I
shouldn’t drink after you or you after me!”
“She don’t ’low noner us to drink noner this here milk,” Randall said.
Asbury continued to hold the glass out to him. “You took the the cigarette,” he
said. “Take the milk. It’s not going to hurt my mother to lose two or three glasses
of milk a day. We’ve got to think free if we want to live free!”
The other one had come up and was standing in the door.
“Don’t want noner that milk,” Randall said.
Asbury swung around and held the glass out to Morgan. “Here boy, have a
drink of this,” he said.
Morgan stared at him; then his face took on a decided look of cunning. “I ain’t
seen you drink none of it yourself,” he said.
Asbury despised milk. The first warm glassful had turned his stomach. He
drank half of what he was holding and handed the rest to the Negro, who took it
and gazed down inside the glass as if it contained some great mystery; then he set
it on the floor by the cooler.
“Don’t you like milk?” Asbury asked.
“I likes it but I ain’t drinking noner that.”
“Why?”
“She don’t ’low it,” Morgan said.
“My God!” Asbury exploded, “she she she!” He had tried the same thing the
next day and the next and the next but he could not get them to drink the milk. A
few afternoons later when he was standing outside the milk house about to go in,
he heard Morgan ask, “Howcome you let himdrink that milk every day?”
“What he do is him,” Randall said. “What I do is me.”
“Howcome he talks so ugly about his ma?”
“She ain’t whup himenough when he was little,” Randall said.
The insufferableness of life at home had overcome him and he had returned to
New York two days early. So far as he was concerned he had died there, and the
question now was how long he could stand to linger here. He could have hastened
his end but suicide would not have been a victory. Death was coming to him
legitimately, as a justification, as a gift from life. That was his greatest triumph.
Then too, to the fine minds of the neighborhood, a suicide son would indicate a
mother who had been a failure, and while this was the case, he felt that it was a
public embarrassment he could spare her. What she would learn from the letter
would be a private revelation. He had sealed the notebooks in a manila envelope
and had written on it: “To be opened only after the death of Asbury Porter Fox.”
He had put the envelope in the desk drawer in his room and locked it and the key
was in his pajama pocket until he could decide on a place to leave it.
When they sat on the porch in the morning, his mother felt that some of the time
she should talk about subjects that were of interest to him. The third morning she
started in on his writing. “When you get well,” she said, “I think it would be nice
if you wrote a book about down here. We need another good book like Gone With
the Wind.”
He could feel the muscles in his stomach begin to tighten.
“Put the war in it,” she advised. “That always makes a long book.”
He put his head back gently as if he were afraid it would crack. After a
moment he said, “I amnot going to write any book.”
“Well,” she said, “if you don’t feel like writing a book, you could just write
poems. They’re nice.” She realized that what he needed was someone intellectual
to talk to, but Mary George was the only intellectual she knew and he would not
talk to her. She had thought of Mr. Bush, the retired Methodist minister, but she
had not brought this up. Now she decided to hazard it. “I think I’ll ask Dr. Bush to
come to see you,” she said, raising Mr. Bush’s rank. “You’d enjoy him. He
collects rare coins.”
She was not prepared for the reaction she got. He began to shake all over and
give loud spasmodic laughs. He seemed about to choke. After a minute he
subsided into a cough. “If you think I need spiritual aid to die,” he said, “you’re
quite mistaken. And certainly not fromthat ass Bush. My God!”
“I didn’t mean that at all,” she said. “He has coins dating from the time of
Cleopatra.”
“Well if you ask him here, I’ll tell him to go to hell,” he said. “Bush! That
beats all!”
“I’mglad something amuses you,” she said acidly.
For a time they sat there in silence. Then his mother looked up. He was sitting
forward again and smiling at her. His face was brightening more and more as if he
had just had an idea that was brilliant. She stared at him. “I’ll tell you who I want
to come,” he said. For the first time since he had come home, his expression was
pleasant; though there was also, she thought, a kind of crafty look about him.
“Who do you want to come?” she asked suspiciously.
“I want a priest,” he announced.
“A priest?” his mother said in an uncomprehending voice.
“Preferably a Jesuit,” he said, brightening more and more. “Yes, by all means
a Jesuit. They have themin the city. You can call up and get me one.”
“What is the matter with you?” his mother asked.
“Most of them are very well-educated,” he said, “but Jesuits are foolproof. A
Jesuit would be able to discuss something besides the weather.” Already,
remembering Ignatius Vogle, S.J., he could picture the priest. This one would be a
trifle more worldly perhaps, a trifle more cynical. Protected by their ancient
institution, priests could afford to be cynical, to play both ends against the middle.
He would talk to a man of culture before he died—even in this desert!
Furthermore, nothing would irritate his mother so much. He could not understand
why he had not thought of this sooner.
“You’re not a member of that church,” Mrs. Fox said shortly. “It’s twenty
miles away. They wouldn’t send one.” She hoped that this would end the matter.
He sat back absorbed in the idea, determined to force her to make the call
since she always did what he wanted if he kept at her. “I’m dying,” he said, “and I
haven’t asked you to do but one thing and you refuse me that.”
“You are NOT dying.”
“When you realize it,” he said, “it’ll be too late.”
There was another unpleasant silence. Presently his mother said, “Nowadays
doctors don’t let young people die. They give themsome of these new medicines.”
She began shaking her foot with a nerve-rattling assurance. “People just don’t die
like they used to,” she said.
“Mother,” he said, “you ought to be prepared. I think even Block knows and
hasn’t told you yet.” Block, after the first visit, had come in grimly every time,
without his jokes and funny faces, and had taken his blood in silence, his nickelcolored
eyes unfriendly. He was, by definition, the enemy of death and he looked
now as if he knew he was battling the real thing. He had said he wouldn’t
prescribe until he knew what was wrong and Asbury had laughed in his face.
“Mother,” he said, “I AM going to die,” and he tried to make each word like a
hammer blow on top of her head.
She paled slightly but she did not blink. “Do you think for one minute,” she
said angrily, “that I intend to sit here and let you die?” Her eyes were as hard as
two old mountain ranges seen in the distance. He felt the first distinct stroke of
doubt.
“Do you?” she asked fiercely.
“I don’t think you have anything to do with it,” he said in a shaken voice.
“Humph,” she said and got up and left the porch as if she could not stand to be
around such stupidity an instant longer.
Forgetting the Jesuit, he went rapidly over his symptoms: his fever had
increased, interspersed by chills; he barely had the energy to drag himself out on
the porch; food was abhorrent to him; and Block had not been able to give her the
least satisfaction. Even as he sat there, he felt the beginning of a new chill, as if
death were already playfully rattling his bones. He pulled the afghan off his feet
and put it around his shoulders and made his way unsteadily up the stairs to bed.
He continued to grow worse. In the next few days he became so much weaker
and badgered her so constantly about the Jesuit that finally in desperation she
decided to humor his foolishness. She made the call, explaining in a chilly voice
that her son was ill, perhaps a little out of his head, and wished to speak to a
priest. While she made the call, Asbury hung over the banisters, barefooted, with
the afghan around him, and listened. When she hung up he called down to know
when the priest was coming.
“Tomorrow sometime,” his mother said irritably.
He could tell by the fact that she made the call that her assurance was
beginning to shatter. Whenever she let Block in or out, there was much whispering
in the downstairs hall. That evening, he heard her and Mary George talking in low
voices in the parlor. He thought he heard his name and he got up and tiptoed into
the hall and down the first three steps until he could hear the voices distinctly.
“I had to call that priest,” his mother was saying. “I’m afraid this is serious. I
thought it was just a nervous breakdown but now I think it’s something real.
Doctor Block thinks it’s something real too and whatever it is is worse because
he’s so run-down.”
“Grow up, Mamma,” Mary George said, “I’ve told you and I tell you again:
what’s wrong with him is purely psychosomatic.” There was nothing she was not
an expert on.
“No,” his mother said, “it’s a real disease. The doctor says so.” He thought he
detected a crack in her voice.
“Block is an idiot,” Mary George said. “You’ve got to face the facts: Asbury
can’t write so he gets sick. He’s going to be an invalid instead of an artist. Do you
know what he needs?”
“No,” his mother said.
“Two or three shock treatments,” Mary George said. “Get that artist business
out of his head once and for all.”
His mother gave a little cry and he grasped the banister.
“Mark my words,” his sister continued, “all he’s going to be around here for
the next fifty years is a decoration.”
He went back to bed. In a sense she was right. He had failed his god, Art, but
he had been a faithful servant and Art was sending him Death. He had seen this
from the first with a kind of mystical clarity. He went to sleep thinking of the
peaceful spot in the family burying ground where he would soon lie, and after a
while he saw that his body was being borne slowly toward it while his mother
and Mary George watched without interest from their chairs on the porch. As the
bier was carried across the dam, they could look up and see the procession
reflected upside down in the pond. A lean dark figure in a Roman collar followed
it. He had a mysteriously saturnine face in which there was a subtle blend of
asceticism and corruption. Asbury was laid in a shallow grave on the hillside and
the indistinct mourners, after standing in silence for a while, spread out over the
darkening green. The Jesuit retired to a spot beneath a dead tree to smoke and
meditate. The moon came up and Asbury was aware of a presence bending over
himand a gentle warmth on his cold face. He knew that this was Art come to wake
him and he sat up and opened his eyes. Across the hill all the lights were on in his
mother’s house. The black pond was speckled with little nickel-colored stars. The
Jesuit had disappeared. All around him the cows were spread out grazing in the
moonlight and one large white one, violently spotted, was softly licking his head
as if it were a block of salt. He awoke with a shudder and discovered that his bed
was soaking froma night sweat and as he sat shivering in the dark, he realized that
the end was not many days distant. He gazed down into the crater of death and fell
back dizzy on his pillow.
The next day his mother noted something almost ethereal about his ravaged
face. He looked like one of those dying children who must have Christmas early.
He sat up in the bed and directed the rearrangement of several chairs and had her
remove a picture of a maiden chained to a rock for he knew it would make the
Jesuit smile. He had the comfortable rocker taken away and when he finished, the
roomwith its severe wall stains had a certain cell-like quality. He felt it would be
attractive to the visitor.
All morning he waited, looking irritably up at the ceiling where the bird with
the icicle in its beak seemed poised and waiting too; but the priest did not arrive
until late in the afternoon. As soon as his mother opened the door, a loud
unintelligible voice began to boom in the downstairs hall. Asbury’s heart beat
wildly. In a second there was a heavy creaking on the stairs. Then almost at once
his mother, her expression constrained, came in followed by a massive old man
who plowed straight across the room, picked up a chair by the side of the bed and
put it under himself.
“I’m Father Finn—from Purrgatory,” he said in a hearty voice. He had a large
red face, a stiff brush of gray hair and was blind in one eye, but the good eye, blue
and clear, was focused sharply on Asbury. There was a grease spot on his vest.
“So you want to talk to a priest?” he said. “Very wise. None of us knows the hour
Our Blessed Lord may call us.” Then he cocked his good eye up at Asbury’s
mother and said, “Thank you, you may leave us now.”
Mrs. Fox stiffened and did not budge.
“I’d like to talk to Father Finn alone,” Asbury said, feeling suddenly that here
he had an ally, although he had not expected a priest like this one. His mother gave
him a disgusted look and left the room. He knew she would go no farther than just
outside the door.
“It’s so nice to have you come,” Asbury said. “This place is incredibly dreary.
There’s no one here an intelligent person can talk to. I wonder what you think of
Joyce, Father?”
The priest lifted his chair and pushed closer. “You’ll have to shout,” he said.
“Blind in one eye and deaf in one ear.”
“What do you think of Joyce?” Asbury said louder.
“Joyce? Joyce who?” asked the priest.
“James Joyce,” Asbury said and laughed.
The priest brushed his huge hand in the air as if he were bothered by gnats. “I
haven’t met him,” he said. “Now. Do you say your morning and night prayers?”
Asbury appeared confused. “Joyce was a great writer,” he murmured,
forgetting to shout.
“You don’t eh?” said the priest. “Well you will never learn to be good unless
you pray regularly. You cannot love Jesus unless you speak to Him.”
“The myth of the dying god has always fascinated me,” Asbury shouted, but the
priest did not appear to catch it.
“Do you have trouble with purity?” he demanded, and as Asbury paled, he
went on without waiting for an answer. “We all do but you must pray to the Holy
Ghost for it. Mind, heart and body. Nothing is overcome without prayer. Pray with
your family. Do you pray with your family?”
“God forbid,” Asbury murmured. “My mother doesn’t have time to pray and
my sister is an atheist,” he shouted.
“A shame!” said the priest. “Then you must pray for them.”
“The artist prays by creating,” Asbury ventured.
“Not enough!” snapped the priest. “If you do not pray daily, you are neglecting
your immortal soul. Do you know your catechism?”
“Certainly not,” Asbury muttered.
“Who made you?” the priest asked in a martial tone.
“Different people believe different things about that,” Asbury said.
“God made you,” the priest said shortly. “Who is God?”
“God is an idea created by man,” Asbury said, feeling that he was getting into
stride, that two could play at this.
“God is a spirit infinitely perfect,” the priest said. “You are a very ignorant
boy. Why did God make you?”
“God didn’t.…”
“God made you to know Him, to love Him, to serve Him in this world and to
be happy with Him in the next!” the old priest said in a battering voice. “If you
don’t apply yourself to the catechism how do you expect to know how to save
your immortal soul?”
Asbury saw he had made a mistake and that it was time to get rid of the old
fool. “Listen,” he said, “I’mnot a Roman.”
“A poor excuse for not saying your prayers!” the old man snorted.
Asbury slumped slightly in the bed. “I’mdying,” he shouted.
“But you’re not dead yet!” said the priest, “and how do you expect to meet
God face to face when you’ve never spoken to Him? How do you expect to get
what you don’t ask for? God does not send the Holy Ghost to those who don’t ask
for Him. Ask Himto send the Holy Ghost.”
“The Holy Ghost?” Asbury said.
“Are you so ignorant you’ve never heard of the Holy Ghost?” the priest asked.
“Certainly I’ve heard of the Holy Ghost,” Asbury said furiously, “and the Holy
Ghost is the last thing I’mlooking for!”
“And He may be the last thing you get,” the priest said, his one fierce eye
inflamed. “Do you want your soul to suffer eternal damnation? Do you want to be
deprived of God for all eternity? Do you want to suffer the most terrible pain,
greater than fire, the pain of loss? Do you want to suffer the pain of loss for all
eternity?”
Asbury moved his arms and legs helplessly as if he were pinned to the bed by
the terrible eye.
“How can the Holy Ghost fill your soul when it’s full of trash?” the priest
roared. “The Holy Ghost will not come until you see yourself as you are—a lazy
ignorant conceited youth!” he said, pounding his fist on the little bedside table.
Mrs. Fox burst in. “Enough of this!” she cried. “How dare you talk that way to
a poor sick boy? You’re upsetting him. You’ll have to go.”
“The poor lad doesn’t even know his catechism,” the priest said, rising. “I
should think you would have taught him to say his daily prayers. You have
neglected your duty as his mother.” He turned back to the bed and said affably,
“I’ll give you my blessing and after this you must say your daily prayers without
fail,” whereupon he put his hand on Asbury’s head and rumbled something in
Latin. “Call me any time,” he said, “and we can have another little chat,” and then
he followed Mrs. Fox’s rigid back out. The last thing Asbury heard him say was,
“He’s a good lad at heart but very ignorant.”
When his mother had got rid of the priest she came rapidly up the steps again
to say that she had told him so, but when she saw him, pale and drawn and
ravaged, sitting up in his bed, staring in front of him with large childish shocked
eyes, she did not have the heart and went rapidly out again.
The next morning he was so weak that she made up her mind he must go to the
hospital. “I’m not going to any hospital,” he kept repeating, turning his thudding
head from side to side as if he wanted to work it loose from his body. “I’m not
going to any hospital as long as I’m conscious.” He was thinking bitterly that once
he lost consciousness, she could drag him off to the hospital and fill him full of
blood and prolong his misery for days. He was convinced that the end was
approaching, that it would be today, and he was tormented now thinking of his
useless life. He felt as if he were a shell that had to be filled with something but
he did not know what. He began to take note of everything in the room as if for the
last time—the ridiculous antique furniture, the pattern in the rug, the silly picture
his mother had replaced. He even looked at the fierce bird with the icicle in its
beak and felt that it was there for some purpose that he could not divine.
There was something he was searching for, something that he felt he must
have, some last significant culminating experience that he must make for himself
before he died—make for himself out of his own intelligence. He had always
relied on himself and had never been a sniveler after the ineffable.
Once when Mary George was thirteen and he was five, she had lured him with
the promise of an unnamed present into a large tent full of people and had dragged
him backwards up to the front where a man in a blue suit and red and white tie
was standing. “Here,” she said in a loud voice. “I’m already saved but you can
save him. He’s a real stinker and too big for his britches.” He had broken her grip
and shot out of there like a small cur and later when he had asked for his present,
she had said, “You would have got Salvation if you had waited for it but since you
acted the way you did, you get nothing!”
As the day wore on, he grew more and more frantic for fear he would die
without making some last meaningful experience for himself. His mother sat
anxiously by the side of the bed. She had called Block twice and could not get
him. He thought even now she had not realized that he was going to die, much less
that the end was only hours off.
The light in the room was beginning to have an odd quality, almost as if it
were taking on presence. In a darkened form it entered and seemed to wait.
Outside it appeared to move no farther than the edge of the faded treeline, which
he could see a few inches over the sill of his window. Suddenly he thought of that
experience of communion that he had had in the dairy with the Negroes when they
had smoked together, and at once he began to tremble with excitement. They
would smoke together one last time.
After a moment, turning his head on the pillow, he said, “Mother, I want to tell
the Negroes good-bye.”
His mother paled. For an instant her face seemed about to fly apart. Then the
line of her mouth hardened; her brows drew together. “Good-bye?” she said in a
flat voice. “Where are you going?”
For a few seconds he only looked at her. Then he said, “I think you know. Get
them. I don’t have long.”
“This is absurd,” she muttered but she got up and hurried out. He heard her try
to reach Block again before she went outside. He thought her clinging to Block at
a time like this was touching and pathetic. He waited, preparing himself for the
encounter as a religious man might prepare himself for the last sacrament.
Presently he heard their steps on the stair.
“Here’s Randall and Morgan,” his mother said, ushering them in. “They’ve
come to tell you hello.”
The two of them came in grinning and shuffled to the side of the bed. They
stood there, Randall in front and Morgan behind. “You sho do look well,” Randall
said. “You looks very well.”
“You looks well,” the other one said. “Yessuh, you looks fine.”
“I ain’t ever seen you looking so well before,” Randall said.
“Yes, doesn’t he look well?” his mother said. “I think he looks just fine.”
“Yessuh,” Randall said, “I speck you ain’t even sick.”
“Mother,” Asbury said in a forced voice. “I’d like to talk to themalone.”
His mother stiffened; then she marched out. She walked across the hall and
into the room on the other side and sat down. Through the open doors he could see
her begin to rock in little short jerks. The two Negroes looked as if their last
protection had dropped away.
Asbury’s head was so heavy he could not think what he had been going to do.
“I’mdying,” he said.
Both their grins became gelid. “You looks fine,” Randall said.
“I’m going to die,” Asbury repeated. Then with relief he remembered that they
were going to smoke together. He reached for the package on the table and held it
out to Randall, forgetting to shake out the cigarettes.
The Negro took the package and put it in his pocket. “I thank you,” he said. “I
certainly do prechate it.”
Asbury stared as if he had forgotten again. After a second he became aware
that the other Negro’s face had turned infinitely sad; then he realized that it was
not sad but sullen. He fumbled in the drawer of the table and pulled out an
unopened package and thrust it at Morgan.
“I thanks you, Mist Asbury,” Morgan said, brightening. “You certly does look
well.”
“I’mabout to die,” Asbury said irritably.
“You looks fine,” Randall said.
“You be up and around in a few days,” Morgan predicted. Neither of them
seemed to find a suitable place to rest his gaze. Asbury looked wildly across the
hall where his mother had her rocker turned so that her back faced him. It was
apparent she had no intention of getting rid of themfor him.
“I speck you might have a little cold,” Randall said after a time.
“I takes a little turpentine and sugar when I has a cold,” Morgan said.
“Shut your mouth,” Randall said, turning on him.
“Shut your own mouth,” Morgan said. “I know what I takes.”
“He don’t take what you take,” Randall growled.
“Mother!” Asbury called in a shaking voice.
His mother stood up. “Mister Asbury has had company long enough now,” she
called. “You all can come back tomorrow.”
“We be going,” Randall said. “You sho do look well.”
“You sho does,” Morgan said.
They filed out agreeing with each other how well he looked but Asbury’s
vision became blurred before they reached the hall. For an instant he saw his
mother’s form as if it were a shadow in the door and then it disappeared after
them down the stairs. He heard her call Block again but he heard it without
interest. His head was spinning. He knew now there would be no significant
experience before he died. There was nothing more to do but give her the key to
the drawer where the letter was, and wait for the end.
He sank into a heavy sleep from which he awoke about five o’clock to see her
white face, very small, at the end of a well of darkness. He took the key out of his
pajama pocket and handed it to her and mumbled that there was a letter in the desk
to be opened when he was gone, but she did not seem to understand. She put the
key down on the bedside table and left it there and he returned to his dream in
which two large boulders were circling each other inside his head.
He awoke a little after six to hear Block’s car stop below in the driveway.
The sound was like a summons, bringing him rapidly and with a clear head out of
his sleep. He had a sudden terrible foreboding that the fate awaiting him was
going to be more shattering than any he could have reckoned on. He lay absolutely
motionless, as still as an animal the instant before an earthquake.
Block and his mother talked as they came up the stairs but he did not
distinguish their words. The doctor came in making faces; his mother was smiling.
“Guess what you’ve got, Sugarpie!” she cried. Her voice broke in on him with the
force of a gunshot.
“Found theter ol’ bug, did ol’ Block,” Block said, sinking down into the chair
by the bed. He raised his hands over his head in the gesture of a victorious prize
fighter and let them collapse in his lap as if the effort had exhausted him. Then he
removed a red bandanna handkerchief that he carried to be funny with and wiped
his face thoroughly, having a different expression on it every time it appeared
frombehind the rag.
“I think you’re just as smart as you can be!” Mrs. Fox said. “Asbury,” she
said, “you have undulant fever. It’ll keep coming back but it won’t kill you!” Her
smile was as bright and intense as a lightbulb without a shade. “I’m so relieved,”
she said.
Asbury sat up slowly, his face expressionless; then he fell back down again.
Block leaned over him and smiled. “You ain’t going to die,” he said, with
deep satisfaction.
Nothing about Asbury stirred except his eyes. They did not appear to move on
the surface but somewhere in their blurred depths there was an almost
imperceptible motion as if something were struggling feebly. Block’s gaze seemed
to reach down like a steel pin and hold whatever it was until the life was out of it.
“Undulant fever ain’t so bad, Azzberry,” he murmured. “It’s the same as Bang’s in
a cow.”
The boy gave a low moan and then was quiet.
“He must have drunk some unpasteurized milk up there,” his mother said softly
and then the two of themtiptoed out as if they thought he were about to go to sleep.
When the sound of their footsteps had faded on the stairs, Asbury sat up again.
He turned his head, almost surreptitiously, to the side where the key he had given
his mother was lying on the bedside table. His hand shot out and closed over it
and returned it to his pocket. He glanced across the room into the small ovalframed
dresser mirror. The eyes that stared back at him were the same that had
returned his gaze every day from that mirror but it seemed to him that they were
paler. They looked shocked clean as if they had been prepared for some awful
vision about to come down on him. He shuddered and turned his head quickly the
other way and stared out the window. A blinding red-gold sun moved serenely
from under a purple cloud. Below it the treeline was black against the crimson
sky. It formed a brittle wall, standing as if it were the frail defense he had set up in
his mind to protect him from what was coming. The boy fell back on his pillow
and stared at the ceiling. His limbs that had been racked for so many weeks by
fever and chill were numb now. The old life in him was exhausted. He awaited
the coming of new. It was then that he felt the beginning of a chill, a chill so
peculiar, so light, that it was like a warm ripple across a deeper sea of cold. His
breath came short. The fierce bird which through the years of his childhood and
the days of his illness had been poised over his head, waiting mysteriously,
appeared all at once to be in motion. Asbury blanched and the last film of illusion
was torn as if by a whirlwind from his eyes. He saw that for the rest of his days,
frail, racked, but enduring, he would live in the face of a purifying terror. A feeble
cry, a last impossible protest escaped him. But the Holy Ghost, emblazoned in ice
instead of fire, continued, implacable, to descend.