ENOCH EMERY knew when he woke up that today the person he could show it to
was going to come. He knew by his blood. He had wise blood like his daddy.
At two o’clock that afternoon, he greeted the second-shift gate guard. “You
ain’t but only fifteen minutes late,” he said irritably. “But I stayed. I could of went
on but I stayed.” He wore a green uniform with yellow piping on the neck and
sleeves and a yellow stripe down the outside of each leg. The second-shift guard,
a boy with a jutting shale-textured face and a toothpick in his mouth, wore the
same. The gate they were standing by was made of iron bars and the concrete arch
that held it was fashioned to look like two trees; branches curved to form the top
of it where twisted letters said, CITY FOREST PARK. The second-shift guard leaned
against one of the trunks and began prodding between his teeth with the pick.
“Ever day,” Enoch complained; “look like ever day I lose fifteen good minutes
standing here waiting on you.”
Every day when he got off duty, he went into the park and every day when he
went in, he did the same things. He went first to the swimming pool. He was
afraid of the water but he liked to sit up on the bank above it if there were any
women in the pool, and watch them. There was one woman who came every
Monday who wore a bathing suit that was split on each hip. At first he thought she
didn’t know it, and instead of watching openly on the bank, he had crawled into
some bushes, snickering to himself and had watched from there. There had been
no one else in the pool—the crowds didn’t come until four o’clock—to tell her
about the split and she had splashed around in the water and then lain up on the
edge of the pool asleep for almost an hour, all the time without suspecting there
was somebody in the bushes looking at where she came out of the suit. Then on
another day when he stopped a little later, he saw three women, all with their suits
split, the pool full of people, and nobody paying them any mind. That was how the
city was—always surprising him. He visited a whore every time he had two
dollars to spare but he was continually being shocked by the looseness he saw in
the open. He crawled into the bushes out of a sense of propriety. Very often the
women would pull the suit straps down off their shoulders and lie stretched out.
The park was the heart of the city. He had come to the city—with a knowing in
his blood—he had established himself at the heart of it. Every day he looked at the
heart of it; every day; and he was so stunned and awed and overwhelmed that just
to think about it made him sweat. There was something, in the center of the park,
that he had discovered. It was a mystery, although it was right there in a glass case
for everybody to see and there was a typewritten card telling all about it right
there. But there was something the card couldn’t say and what it couldn’t say was
inside him, a terrible knowledge without any words to it, a terrible knowledge
like a big nerve growing inside him. He could not show the mystery to just
anybody; but he had to show it to somebody. Who he had to show it to was a
special person. This person could not be from the city but he didn’t know why. He
knew he would know himwhen he saw himand he knew that he would have to see
him soon or the nerve inside him would grow so big that he would be forced to
rob a bank or jump on a woman or drive a stolen car into the side of a building.
His blood all morning had been saying the person would come today.
He left the second-shift guard and approached the pool from a discreet
footpath that led behind the ladies’end of the bath house to a small clearing where
the entire pool could be seen at once. There was nobody in it—the water was
bottle-green and motionless—but he saw, coming up the other side and heading
for the bath house, the woman with the two little boys. She came every other day
or so and brought the two children. She would go in the water with themand swim
down the pool and then she would lie up on the side in the sun. She had a stained
white bathing suit that fit her like a sack, and Enoch had watched her with
pleasure on several occasions. He moved from the clearing up a slope to some
abelia bushes. There was a nice tunnel under them and he crawled into it until he
came to a slightly wider place where he was accustomed to sit. He settled himself
and adjusted the abelia so that he could see through it properly. His face was
always very red in the bushes. Anyone who parted the abelia sprigs at just that
place would think he saw a devil and would fall down the slope and into the pool.
The woman and the two little boys entered the bath house.
Enoch never went immediately to the dark secret center of the park. That was
the peak of the afternoon. The other things he did built up to it and they had
become very formal and necessary. When he left the bushes, he would go to the
FROSTY BOTTLE, a hot-dog stand in the shape of an Orange Crush with frost painted
in blue around the top of it. Here he would have a chocolate malted milkshake and
would make a few suggestive remarks to the waitress whom he believed to be
secretly in love with him. After that he would go to see the animals. They were in
a long set of steel cages like Alcatraz Penitentiary in the movies. The cages were
electrically heated in the winter and air-conditioned in the summer and there were
six men hired to wait on the animals and feed them T-bone steaks. The animals
didn’t do anything but lie around. Enoch watched them every day, full of awe and
hate. Then he went there.
The two little boys ran out the bath house and dove into the water, and
simultaneously a grating noise issued from the driveway on the other side of the
pool. Enoch’s head pierced out the bushes. He saw a high rat-colored car passing,
which sounded as if its motor were dragging out the back. The car passed and he
could hear it rattle around the turn in the drive and on away. He listened carefully,
trying to hear if it would stop. The noise receded and then gradually grew louder.
The car passed again. Enoch saw this time that there was only one person in it, a
man. The sound of it died away again and then grew louder. The car came around
a third time and stopped almost directly opposite Enoch across the pool. The man
in the car looked out the window and down the grass slope to the water where the
two little boys were splashing and screaming. Enoch’s head was as far out the
bushes as it could come and he was squinting. The door by the man was tied on
with a rope. The man got out the other door and walked in front of the car and
came halfway down the slope to the pool. He stood there a minute as if he were
looking for somebody and then he sat down stiffly on the grass. He had on a suit
that looked as if it had glare in it. He sat with his knees drawn up. “Well, I’ll be
dog,” Enoch said. “Well, I’ll be dog.”
He began crawling out of the bushes immediately, his heart moving so fast it
was like one of those motorcycles at fairs that the fellow drives around the walls
of a pit. He even remembered the man’s name—Mr. Hazel Weaver. In a second he
appeared on all fours at the end of the abelia and looked across the pool. The blue
figure was still sitting there in the same position. He had the look of being held
there, like by an invisible hand, like if the hand lifted up, the figure would spring
across the pool in one leap without the expression on his face changing once.
The woman came out the bath house and went straight to the diving board. She
spread her arms out and began to bounce, making a big heavy flapping sound with
the board. Then suddenly she swirled backwards and disappeared below the
water. Mr. Hazel Weaver’s head turned very slowly, following her down the
pool.
Enoch got up and went down the path behind the bath house. He came
stealthily out on the other side and started walking toward Haze. He stayed on the
top of the slope, moving softly in the grass just off the sidewalk, and making no
noise. When he was directly behind him, he sat down on the edge of the sidewalk.
If his arms had been ten feet long, he could have put his hands on Haze’s
shoulders. He studied himquietly.
The woman was climbing out the pool, chinning herself up on the side. First
her face appeared, long and cadaverous, with a bandage-like bathing cap coming
down almost to her eyes, and sharp teeth protruding fromher mouth. Then she rose
on her hands until a large foot and leg came up from behind her and another on the
other side and she was out, squatting there, panting. She stood up loosely and
shook herself, and stamped in the water dripping off her. She was facing them and
she grinned. Enoch could see a part of Hazel Weaver’s face watching the woman.
It didn’t grin in return but it kept on watching her as she padded over to a spot of
sun almost directly under where they were sitting. Enoch had to move a little to
see.
The woman sat down in the spot of sun and took off her bathing cap. Her hair
was short and matted and all sorts of colors, from deep rust to a polluted lemon
yellow. She shook her head and then she looked up at Hazel Weaver again,
grinning through her pointed teeth. She stretched herself out in the spot of sun,
raising her knees and settling her backbone down against the concrete. The two
little boys, at the other end of the water, were knocking each other’s heads against
the side of the pool. She settled herself until she was flat against the concrete and
then she reached up and pulled the bathing suit straps off her shoulders.
“King Jesus!” Enoch whispered and before he could get his eyes off the
woman, Haze Weaver had sprung up and was almost to his car. The woman was
sitting straight up with the suit half off her in front, and Enoch was looking both
ways at once. He wrenched his attention loose from the woman and darted after
Hazel Weaver.
“Wait on me!” he shouted and waved his arms in front of the car which was
already rattling and starting to go. Hazel Weaver cut off the motor. His face
behind the windshield was sour and froglike; it looked like it had a shout closed
up in it, it looked like one of those closet doors in gangster pictures where there is
somebody tied to a chair behind it with a towel in his mouth.
“Well,” Enoch said, “I declare if it ain’t Hazel Weaver. How are you, Hazel?”
“The guard said I’d find you at the swimming pool,” Hazel Weaver said. “He
said you hid in the bushes and watched the swiming.”
Enoch blushed. “I allus have admired swimming,” he said. Then he stuck his
head farther through the window. “You were looking for me?” he exclaimed.
“Those people,” Haze said, “those people named Moats—did she tell you
where they lived?”
Enoch didn’t seemto hear. “You came out here special to see me?” he said.
“Asa and Sabbath Moats—she gave you the peeler. Did she tell you where
they lived?”
Enoch eased his head out the car. He opened the door and climbed in beside
Haze. For a minute he only looked at him, wetting his lips. Then he whispered, “I
got to show you something.”
“I’m looking for those people,” Haze said. “I got to see that man. Did she tell
you where they live?”
“I got to show you this thing,” Enoch said. “I got to show it to you, here, this
afternoon. I got to.” He gripped Hazel Weaver’s arm and Hazel Weaver shook
himoff.
“Did she tell you where they live?” he said again.
Enoch kept wetting his lips. They were pale except for his fever blister, which
was purple. “Sho,” he said. “Ain’t she invited me to come see her and bring my
harp? I got to show you this thing,” he said, “then I’ll tell you.”
“What thing?” Haze muttered.
“This thing I got to show you,” Enoch said. “Drive straight on ahead and I’ll
tell you where to stop.”
“I don’t want to see anything of yours,” Hazel Weaver said. “I got to have that
address.”
“I won’t be able to remember it unless you come,” Enoch said. He didn’t look
at Hazel Weaver. He looked out the window. In a minute the car started. Enoch’s
blood was beating fast. He knew he had to go to the FROSTY BOTTLE and the zoo
before there, and he foresaw a terrible struggle with Hazel Weaver. He would
have to get him there, even if he had to hit him over the head with a rock, and
carry himon his back right up to it.
Enoch’s brain was divided into two parts. The part in communication with his
blood did the figuring but it never said anything in words. The other part was
stocked up with all kinds of words and phrases. While the first part was figuring
how to get Hazel Weaver through the FROSTY BOTTLE and the zoo, the second
inquired, “Where’d you git thisyer fine car? You ought to paint you some signs on
the outside it, like ‘step-in, baby’—I seen one with that on it, then I seen another
with.…”
Hazel Weaver’s face might have been cut out the side of a rock.
“My daddy once owned a yeller Ford automobile he won on a ticket,” Enoch
murmured. “It had a roll-up top and two arials and a squirril tail all come with it.
He swapped it off. Stop here! Stop here!” he yelled—they were passing the
FROSTY BOTTLE.
“Where is it?” Hazel Weaver said as soon as they were inside. They were in a
dark room with a counter across the back of it and brown stools like toadstools in
front of the counter. On the wall facing the door there was a large advertisement
for ice cream, showing a cow dressed like a housewife.
“It ain’t here,” Enoch said. “We have to stop here on the way and get
something to eat. What you want?”
“Nothing,” Haze muttered. He stood stiffly in the middle of the room with his
hands in his pockets and his neck drawn down inside his collar.
“Well, sit down,” Enoch said. “I have to have a little drink.”
Something stirred behind the counter and a woman with bobbed hair like a
man’s got up from a chair where she had been reading the newspaper, and came
forward. She looked sourly at Enoch. She had on a once-white uniform clotted
with brown stains. “What you want?” she said in a loud voice, leaning close to his
ear as if he were deaf. She had a man’s face and big muscled arms.
“I want a chocolate malted milkshake, baby girl,” Enoch said softly. “I want a
lot of ice creamin it.”
She turned fiercely fromhimand glared at Haze.
“He says he don’t want nothing but to sit down and look at you for a while,”
Enoch said. “He ain’t hungry but for just to see you.”
Haze looked woodenly at the woman and she turned her back on him and
began mixing the milkshake. He sat down on the last stool in the row and started
cracking his knuckles.
Enoch watched him carefully. “I reckon you done changed some,” he
murmured after a few minutes.
Haze’s neck jerked around and he started forward. “Give me those people’s
address. Right now,” he said.
It came to Enoch in an instant. The police. His face was suddenly suffused
with secret knowledge. “I reckon you ain’t as uppity as you used to be,” he said.
“I reckon maybe,” he said, “you ain’t got so much cause now as you had then.”
Stole theter automobile, he thought.
Hazel Weaver sat back down. There was no expression on his face but inside
his sour wet eyes, something moved. He turned away fromEnoch.
“How come you jumped up so fast down yonder at the pool?” Enoch asked.
The woman turned around to himwith the malted milk in her hand. “Of course,” he
said evilly, “I wouldn’t have had no truck with a ugly dish like that neither.”
The woman thumped the malted milk on the counter in front of him. “Fifteen
cents,” she roared.
“You’re worth more than that, baby girl,” Enoch said. He snickered and began
gassing his malted milk through the straw.
The woman strode over to where Haze was. “What do you come in here with a
son of a bitch like that for?” she shouted. “A nice quiet boy like you to come in
here with a son of a bitch. You ought to mind the company you keep.” Her name
was Maude and she drank whiskey all day from a fruit jar under the counter.
“Jesus,” she said, wiping her hand under her nose. She sat down in a straight chair
in front of Haze but facing Enoch, and folded her arms across her chest. “Ever
day,” she said to Haze, looking at Enoch, “ever day that son of a bitch comes in
here.”
Enoch was thinking about the animals. They had to go next to the animals. He
hated them; just thinking about them made his face turn a chocolate purple color as
if the malted milk were rising in his head.
“You’re a nice boy,” she said, “I can see you got a clean nose, well keep it
clean, don’t go messin with a son of a bitch like that yonder. I always know a
clean boy when I see one.” She was shouting at Enoch, but Enoch watched Hazel
Weaver. It was like something inside Hazel Weaver was winding up, although he
didn’t move on the outside, not even his hands. He just looked pressed down in
that blue suit, like inside it, the thing winding was getting tighter and tighter.
Enoch’s blood told himto hurry. He raced the milkshake up the straw.
“Yes sir,” she said, “there ain’t anything sweeter than a clean boy. God for my
witness. And I know a clean one when I see him and I know a son a bitch when I
see him and there’s a lot of difference and that pus-marked bastard zlurping
through that straw is a goddammed son a bitch and you a clean boy had better
mind how you keep himcompany. I know a clean boy when I see one.”
Enoch screeched in the bottom of his glass. He fished fifteen cents from his
pocket and laid it on the counter and got up. But Hazel Weaver was already up; he
was leaning over the counter toward the woman. She didn’t see him right away
because she was looking at Enoch. He leaned on his hands over the counter until
his face was just a foot fromhers. She turned around and stared at him.
“Come on,” Enoch started, “we don’t have no time to be sassing around with
her. I got to show you this right away, I got.…”
“I ain’t clean,” Haze said.
It was not until he said it again that Enoch heard the words.
“I ain’t clean,” he said again, without any expression on his face or in his
voice, just looking at the woman as if he were looking at a piece of wood.
She stared at him, startled and then outraged. “What do you think I care!” she
screamed. “Why should I give a goddammwhat you are?”
“Come on,” Enoch whined, “come on or I won’t tell you where them people
live.” He caught Haze’s arm and pulled him back from the counter and toward the
door.
“You bastard!” the woman screamed, “what do you think I care about any of
you filthy boys?”
Hazel Weaver pushed the door open quickly and went out. He got back in his
car, and Enoch jumped in behind him. “Okay,” Enoch said, “drive straight on
ahead down this road.”
“What do you want for telling me?” Haze said. “I’m not staying here. I have to
go. I can’t stay here any longer.”
Enoch shuddered. He began wetting his lips. “I got to show it to you,” he said
hoarsely. “I can’t show it to nobody but you. I had a sign it was you when I seen
you drive up at the pool. I knew all morning somebody was gonna come and then
when I saw you at the pool, I had thisyer sign.”
“I don’t care about your signs,” Haze said.
“I go to see it ever day,” Enoch said. “I go ever day but I ain’t ever been able
to take nobody else with me. I had to wait on the sign. I’ll tell you them people’s
address just as soon as you see it. You got to see it,” he said. “When you see it,
something’s going to happen.”
“Nothing’s going to happen,” Haze said.
He started the car again and Enoch sat forward on the seat. “Them animals,”
he muttered. “We got to walk by them first. It won’t take long for that. It won’t
take a minute.” He saw the animals waiting evil-eyed for him, ready to throw him
off time. He thought what if the police were screaming out here now with sirens
and squad cars and they got to Hazel Weaver just before he showed it to him.
“I got to see those people,” Haze said.
“Stop here! Stop here!” Enoch cried.
There was a long shining row of steel cages over to the left and behind the
bars, black figures were sitting or pacing. “Get out,” Enoch said. “This won’t take
one second.”
Haze got out. Then he stopped. “I got to see those people,” he said.
“Okay, okay, come on,” Enoch whined.
“I don’t believe you know the address.”
“I do! I do!” Enoch cried. “It begins with a two, now come on!” He pulled
Haze toward the cages. There were two black bears in the first one. They were
sitting facing each other like two matrons having tea, their faces polite and selfabsorbed.
“They don’t do nothing but sit there all day and stink,” Enoch said. “A
man comes and washes theseyer cages out ever morning with a hose and it stinks
just as much as if he’d left it.” Every animal there had a personal haughty hatred
for him like society people have for climbers. He went on past two more cages of
bears, not even looking at them, and then he stopped at the next cage where there
were two yellow-eyed wolves nosing around the edges of the concrete. “Hyenas,”
he said. “I ain’t got no use for hyenas.” He leaned closer and spit into the cage,
hitting one of the wolves on the leg. It shuttled to one side, giving him a slanted
evil look. For a second he forgot Hazel Weaver. Then he looked back quickly to
make sure he was still there. He was right behind him. He was not looking at the
animals. Thinking about them police, Enoch thought. He said, “Come on, we don’t
have to look at all theseyer monkeys that come next.” Usually he stopped at every
cage and made an obscene comment aloud to himself, but today the animals were
only a form he had to get through. He hurried past the cages of monkeys, looking
back two or three times to make sure Hazel Weaver was behind him. At the last of
the monkey cages, he stopped as if he couldn’t help himself.
“Look at that ape,” he said, glaring. The animal had its back to him, gray
except for a small pink seat. “If I had a ass like that,” he said prudishly, “I’d sit on
it. I wouldn’t be exposing it to all these people come to this park. Come on, we
don’t have to look at theseyer birds that come next.” He ran past the cages of birds
and then he was at the end of the zoo. “Now we don’t need the car,” he said, going
on ahead, “we’ll go right down that hill yonder through them trees.” He stopped
and saw that Hazel Weaver instead of being behind him had stopped at the last
cage for birds. “Oh Jesus,” he groaned. He stood and waved his arms wildly and
shouted, “Come on!” but Haze didn’t move from where he was looking into the
cage.
Enoch ran back to him and grabbed him by the arm but Haze pushed him off
absently and kept on looking in the cage. It was empty. Enoch stared. “It’s empty!”
he shouted. “What do you have to look in that ole empty cage for? You come on.”
He stood there, sweating and purple. “It’s empty!” he shouted; and then he saw it
wasn’t empty. Over in one corner on the floor of the cage, there was an eye. The
eye was in the middle of something that looked like a piece of mop and the piece
of mop was sitting on an old rag. He squinted close to the wire and saw that the
piece of mop was an owl with one eye open. It was looking directly at Hazel
Weaver. “That ain’t nothing but an ole hoot owl,” he moaned. “You seen them
before.”
“I ain’t clean,” Haze said to the eye. He said it just like he said it to the
woman in the FROSTY BOTTLE. The eye shut softly and the owl turned its head to the
wall.
He’s done murdered somebody, Enoch thought. “Oh sweet Jesus come on!” he
wailed. “I got to show you this right now.” He pulled him away but a few feet
from the cage Haze stopped again, looking at something in the distance. Enoch’s
eyesight was very poor. He squinted and made out a figure far down the road
behind them. There were two smaller figures jumping on either side of it.
Hazel Weaver turned back to him suddenly and said, “Where’s this thing?
Let’s see it right now. Come on.”
“Ain’t that where I been trying to take you,” Enoch murmured. He felt the
perspiration drying on himand stinging and his skin began to get pin-pointed, even
in his scalp. “We got to go on foot,” he said.
“Why?” Haze muttered.
“I don’t know,” Enoch said. He knew something was going to happen to him.
He knew something was going to happen to him. His blood stopped beating. All
the time it had been beating like drum noises and now it had stopped. They started
down the hill. It was a steep hill, full of trees painted white from the ground up
four feet. They looked as if they had on ankle-socks. He gripped Hazel Weaver’s
arm. “It gets damp as you go down,” he said, looking around vaguely. Hazel
Weaver shook him off. In a second, he gripped his arm again and stopped him. He
pointed down through the trees. “Muvseevum,” he said. The strange word made
him shiver. That was the first time he had ever said it aloud. A piece of gray
building was showing where he pointed. It grew larger as they went down the hill,
then as they came to the end of the wood and stepped out on the gravel driveway,
it seemed to shrink suddenly. It was round and soot-colored. There were columns
at the front of it and in between each column there was an eyeless woman holding
a pot on her head. A concrete band was over the columns and the letters
M V S E V M were cut into it. Enoch was afraid to pronounce the word again.
“We got to go up the steps and through the front door,” he whispered. There
were ten steps up to the porch. The door was wide and black. Enoch pushed it in
cautiously and inserted his head in the crack. In a minute he brought it out again
and said, “All right, go in and walk easy. I don’t want to wake up theter ole guard.
He ain’t very friendly with me.” They went into a dark hall. It was heavy with the
odor of linoleum and creosote and another odor behind these two. The third one
was an undersmell and Enoch couldn’t name it as anything he had ever smelled
before. There was nothing in the hall but two urns and an old man asleep in a
straight chair against the wall. He had on the same kind of uniform as Enoch and
he looked like a dried up spider stuck there. Enoch looked at Hazel Weaver to see
if he was smelling the undersmell. He looked like he was; Enoch’s blood began
beating again, and the sound was nearer this time like the drums had moved up
about a quarter of a mile. He gripped Haze’s arm and tip-toed through the hall to
another black door at the end of it. He cracked it a little and inserted his head in
the crack. Then in a second he drew it out and crooked his finger in a gesture for
Haze to follow him. They went into another hall, like the last one but running
crosswise. “It’s in that first door yonder,” Enoch said in a small voice. They went
into a dark room full of glass cases. The glass cases covered the walls and there
were three coffin-like ones in the middle of the floor. The ones on the walls were
full of birds tilted on varnished sticks and looking down with dried piquant
expressions.
“Come on,” Enoch whispered. The drum noises in his blood were getting
closer and closer. He went past the two cases in the middle of the floor and
toward the third one. He went to the farthest end of it and stopped. He stood
looking down with his neck thrust forward and his hands clutched together; Hazel
Weaver moved up beside him.
The two of them stood there, Enoch rigid and Hazel Weaver bent slightly
forward. There were three bowls and a row of blunt weapons and a man in the
case. It was the man Enoch was looking at. He was about three feet long. He was
naked and a dried yellow color and his eyes were squinched shut as if a giant
block of steel were falling down on top of him.
“See theter notice,” Enoch said in a church whisper, pointing to a typewritten
card at the man’s foot, “it says he was once as tall as us. Some A-rabs did it to
himin six months.” He turned his head cautiously to see Hazel Weaver.
All he could tell was that Hazel Weaver’s eyes were on the shrunken man. He
was bent forward so that his face was reflected in the glass top of the case. The
reflection was pale and the eyes were like two clean bullet holes. Enoch waited,
rigid. He heard footsteps in the hall. Oh Jesus Jesus, he prayed, let him hurry up
and do whatever he’s going to do! The footsteps came in the door. He saw the
woman with the two little boys. She had one by each hand, and she was grinning.
Hazel Weaver had not raised his eyes once from the shrunken man. The woman
came toward them. She stopped on the other side of the case and looked down into
it, and the reflection of her face appeared grinning on the glass, over Hazel
Weaver’s. She snickered and put two fingers in front of her teeth. The little boys’
faces were like pans set on either side to catch the grins that overflowed from her.
Haze’s neck jerked back and he made a noise. It was a noise like Enoch hadn’t
ever heard before. It might have come from the man inside the case. In a second
Enoch knew it had. “Wait!” he screamed, and tore out the room after Hazel
Weaver.
He overtook him halfway up the hill. He caught him by the arm and swung him
around and then he stood there, suddenly weak and light as a balloon, and stared.
Hazel Weaver grabbed him by the shoulders and shook him. “What is that
address?” he shouted. “Give me that address!”
Even if Enoch had known the address, he couldn’t have thought of it then. He
could not even stand up. As soon as Hazel Weaver let him go, he fell backwards
and landed against one of the white-socked trees. He rolled over and lay stretched
out on the ground, with an exalted look on his face. He thought he was floating. A
long way off he saw the blue figure spring and pick up a rock, and he saw the wild
face turn, and the rock hurtle toward him; he smiled and shut his eyes. When he
opened them again, Hazel Weaver was gone. He put his fingers to his forehead
and then held them in front of his eyes. They were red-streaked. He turned his
head and saw a drop of blood on the ground and as he looked at it, he thought it
widened like a little spring. He sat straight up, frozen-skinned, and put his finger
in it, and very faintly he could hear his blood beating, his secret blood, in the
center of the city