CALHOUN parked his small pod-shaped car in the driveway to his great-aunts’
house and got out cautiously, looking to the right and left as if he expected the
profusion of azalea blossoms to have a lethal effect upon him. Instead of a decent
lawn, the old ladies had three terraces crammed with red and white azaleas,
beginning at the sidewalk and running backwards to the very edge of their
imposing unpainted house. The two of them were on the front porch, one sitting,
the other standing.
“Here’s our baby!” his Aunt Bessie intoned in a voice meant to reach the other
one, two feet away but deaf. It turned the head of a girl in the next yard, who sat
cross-legged under a tree, reading. She raised her spectacled face, stared at
Calhoun, and then returned her attention—with what he saw plainly was a smirk—
to the book. Scowling, he passed stolidly on to the porch to get over the
preliminaries with his aunts. They would take his voluntary presence in Partridge
at Azalea Festival time to be a sign that his character was improving.
They were box-jawed old ladies who looked like George Washington with his
wooden teeth in. They wore black suits with large ruffled jabots and had deadwhite
hair pulled back. After each had embraced him, he dropped limply into a
rocker and gave them a sheepish smile. He was here only because Singleton had
captured his imagination, but he had told his Aunt Bessie over the telephone that
he was coming to enjoy the festival.
The deaf one, Aunt Mattie, shouted, “Your great-grandfather would have been
delighted to see you taking an interest in the festival, Calhoun. He initiated it
himself, you know.”
“Well,” the boy yelled back, “what about the little extra excitement you’ve had
this time?”
Ten days before the festival began, a man named Singleton had been tried by a
mock court on the courthouse lawn for not buying an Azalea Festival Badge.
During the trial he had been imprisoned in a pair of stocks and when convicted, he
had been locked in the “jail” together with a goat that had been tried and
convicted previously for the same offense. The “jail” was an outdoor privy
borrowed for the occasion by the Jaycees. Ten days later, Singleton had appeared
in a side door on the courthouse porch and with a silent automatic pistol, had shot
five of the dignitaries seated there and by mistake one person in the crowd. The
innocent man received the bullet intended for the mayor who at that moment had
reached down to pull up the tongue of his shoe.
“An unfortunate incident,” his Aunt Mattie said. “It mars the festive spirit.”
He heard the girl on the other lawn slam her book. The top of her rose into
view above the hedge—a sloping-forward neck and a small face with a fierce
expression, which she trained briefly on them before she disappeared. “It doesn’t
seem to have marred anything,” he said. “As I passed through town I saw more
people than ever before and all the flags were up. Partridge,” he shouted, “will
bury its dead but will not lose a nickel.” The girl’s front door slammed in the
middle of the sentence.
His Aunt Bessie had gone into the house and come out again with a small
leather box. “You look very like Father,” she said and pulled up her chair beside
him.
Without enthusiasm Calhoun opened the box, which shed a rust-colored dust
over his knees, and removed the miniature of his great-grandfather. He was shown
this every time he came. The old man—round-faced, bald, altogether
unremarkable-looking—sat with his hands knotted on the head of a black stick.
His expression was all innocence and determination. The master merchant, the
boy thought, and flinched. “And what would this stalwart worthy think of
Partridge today,” he asked wryly, “with its festival in full swing after six citizens
have been shot?”
“Father was progressive,” his Aunt Bessie said, “—the most forward-looking
merchant Partridge ever had. He would either have been one of the prominent men
shot or he would have been the one to subdue the maniac.”
The boy did not know how much of this he could stand. In the paper there had
been pictures of the six “victims” and one of Singleton. Singleton’s was the only
distinctive face in the lot. It was broad but bony and bleak. One eye was more
nearly round than the other and in the more nearly round one Calhoun had
recognized the composure of the man who knows he will and who is willing to
suffer for the right to be himself. A calculating contempt lurked in the regular eye
but in the general expression there was the tortured look of the man who becomes
maddened finally by the madness around him. The other six faces were of the
same general stamp as his great-grandfather’s.
“As you get older, you’ll look more and more like Father,” his Aunt Mattie
prophesied. “You have his ruddy complexion and much the same expression.”
“I’ma different type entirely,” he said stiffly.
“Peaches and cream,” his Aunt Bessie guffawed. “You’re getting a little pottummy
too,” she said and took a lunge at his middle with her fist. “How old is our
baby now?”
“Twenty-three,” he muttered, thinking that it could not go on like this for the
whole visit, that once they had roughed himup a bit, they would leave off.
“And do you have a girl?” his Aunt Mattie asked.
“No,” he said wearily. “I take it,” he went on, “that around here Singleton is
considered nothing but a mental case?”
“Yes,” his Aunt Bessie said, “—peculiar. He never conformed. He was not
like the rest of us here.”
“A terrible drawback,” the boy said. Though his eyes were not mismatched,
the shape of his face was broad like Singleton’s; but the real likeness between
themwas interior.
“Since he is insane, he is not responsible,” his Aunt Bessie said.
The boy’s eyes brightened. He sat forward and fixed the old lady with a
narrow gaze. “And where then,” he asked, “does the real guilt lie?”
“Father’s head was as smooth as an infant’s by the time he was thirty,” she
said. “You had better hurry and get you a girl. Ha ha. What are you going to do
with yourself now?”
He reached into his pocket and withdrew his pipe and a sack of tobacco. You
could not ask them questions in depth. They were both good low-church
Episcopalians but they had amoral imaginations. “I think I shall write,” he said
and began to load the bowl.
“Well,” his Aunt Bessie said, “that’s fine. Maybe you’ll be another Margaret
Mitchell.”
“I hope you’ll do us justice,” his Aunt Mattie shouted. “Few do.”
“I’ll do you justice all right,” he said grimly. “I’m writing an expos.…” He
stopped and put the pipe in his mouth and sat back. It would be ridiculous to tell
them. He removed the pipe and said, “Well, that’s too much to go into. It wouldn’t
interest you ladies.”
His Aunt Bessie inclined her head significantly. “Calhoun,” she said, “we
wouldn’t want to be disappointed in you.” They eyed himas if it had just occurred
to themthat the pet snake they had been fondling might after all be poisonous.
“Know the truth,” the boy said with his fiercest look, “and the truth shall make
you free.”
They appeared reassured at his quoting Scripture. “Isn’t he sweet,” his Aunt
Mattie asked, “with his little pipe?”
“Better get you a girl, boy,” his Aunt Bessie said.
* * *
He escaped them in a few minutes and took his bag upstairs and then came down
again, ready to go out and immerse himself in his material. His intention was to
spend the afternoon interviewing people about Singleton. He expected to write
something that would vindicate the madman and he expected the writing of it to
mitigate his own guilt, for his doubleness, his shadow, was cast before him more
darkly than usual in the light of Singleton’s purity.
For the three summer months of the year, he lived with his parents and sold
air-conditioners, boats, and refrigerators so that for the other nine months he could
afford to meet life naturally and bring his real self—the rebel-artist-mystic—to
birth. During these other months he lived on the opposite side of the city in an
unheated walk-up with two other boys who also did nothing. But guilt for the
summer pursued him into the winter; the fact was, he could have fared without the
orgy of selling he cast himself into in the summer.
When he had explained to them that he despised their values, his parents had
looked at each other with a gleam of recognition as if this were what they had
been expecting from what they had read, and his father had offered to give him a
small allowance to finance the flat. He had refused it for the sake of his
independence, but in the depths of himself, he knew it was not for his
independence but because he enjoyed selling. In the face of a customer, he was
carried outside himself; his face began to beam and sweat and all complexity left
him; he was in the grip of a drive as strong as the drive of some men for liquor or
a woman; and he was horribly good at it. He was so good at it that the company
had given him an achievement scroll. He had put quotation marks around the word
achievement and he and his friends used the scroll as a target for darts.
As soon as he had seen Singleton’s picture in the paper, the face began to burn
in his imagination like a dark reproachful liberating star. The next morning he had
telephoned his aunts to expect himand he had driven the hundred and fifty miles to
Partridge in a little short of four hours.
On his way out of the house, his Aunt Bessie halted him and said, “Be back by
six, Baby Lamb, and we’ll have a sweet surprise for you.”
“Rice pudding?” he asked. They were terrible cooks.
“Sweeter by far!” the old lady said and rolled her eyes. He hastened away.
The girl next door had returned with her book to the lawn. He suspected that
he might be supposed to know her. When he came for visits as a child, his aunts
had always produced one of the neighbor’s freak children to play with him—once
a fat moron in a Girl Scout suit, another time a near-sighted boy who recited Bible
verses, and another an almost square girl who had blackened his eye and left. He
thanked God he was now grown and they would no longer dare to fill his time for
him. The girl did not look up as he passed and he did not speak.
Once on the sidewalk, he was affected by the profusion of azaleas. They
seemed to wash in tides of color across the lawns until they surged against the
white house-fronts, crests of pink and crimson, crests of white and a mysterious
shade that was not yet lavender, wild crests of yellow-red. The profusion of color
almost stopped his breath with insidious pleasure. Moss hung from the old trees.
The houses were the most picturesque types of run-down ante-bellum. The taint of
the place was expressed in his great-grandfather’s words which had survived as
the town’s motto: Beauty is Our Money Crop.
His aunts lived five blocks from the business section. He walked them quickly
and came after a few minutes to the edge of the bare commercial scene, which had
the ramshackle courthouse for its center. The sun beat down fiercely on the tops of
cars parked in every available space. Flags, national, state and confederate,
flapped on every corner street light. People milled about. On the quiet shaded
street where his aunts lived and the azaleas were best, he had not passed three
people, but here they all were, staring avidly at the pathetic store displays and
moving with languid reverence past the courthouse porch, the spot where blood
had been spilled.
He wondered if any of them might think he was here for the same reason they
were. He would have liked to start, in Socratic fashion, a street discussion about
where the real guilt for the six deaths lay, but as he surveyed the scene, he saw no
one who looked capable of any genuine interest in meaning. Without set purpose,
he entered a drugstore. The place was dark and smelled of sour vanilla.
He sat down on the high stool at the counter and ordered a limeade. The boy
preparing the drink had elaborate red sideburns and wore on his shirtfront an
Azalea Festival Badge—the emblem which Singleton had refused to buy.
Calhoun’s eye fell on it at once. “I see you’ve paid your tribute to the god,” he
said.
The boy did not seemto get the significance of this.
“The badge,” Calhoun said, “the badge.”
The boy looked down at it and then back at Calhoun. He put the drink on the
counter and continued to look at him as if he were serving someone with an
interesting deformity.
“Are you enjoying the festive spirit?” Calhoun asked.
“All these doings?” the boy said.
“These grand events,” Calhoun said, “commencing with, I believe, six deaths.”
“Yessir,” the boy said, “six in cold blood. And I knew four of themmyself.”
“You too have had your share of the glory then,” Calhoun said. He felt
suddenly a distinct hush fall on the street outside. He turned his eyes to the door
just in time to see a hearse pass, followed by a line of slowly moving cars.
“That’s the man that’s having his funeral to himself,” the boy said reverently.
“The five that were supposed to get shot had theirs yesterday. One big one. But he
didn’t die in time for it.”
“They have innocent as well as guilty blood on their hands,” Calhoun said and
glared at the boy.
“It wasn’t no they,” the boy said. “One man done it all. A man named
Singleton. He was bats.”
“Singleton was only the instrument,” Calhoun said. “Partridge itself is guilty.”
He finished his drink in a gulp and put down the glass.
The boy was looking at him as if he were mad. “Patridge can’t shoot nobody,”
he said in a high exasperated voice.
Calhoun put his dime on the counter and left. The last car had turned at the end
of the block. He thought he observed less activity. People had obviously hastened
away at the sight of the hearse. Two doors from him an old man leaned out of a
hardware store and glared up the street where the procession had disappeared.
Calhoun’s need to communicate was urgent. He approached diffidently. “I
understand that was the last funeral,” he said.
The old man put a hand behind his ear.
“The funeral of the innocent man,” Calhoun shouted and nodded up the street.
The old man cleared his nostrils loudly. His expression was not affable. “The
only bullet that went right,” he said in a rasping voice. “Biller was a wastrel.
Drunk at the time.”
The boy scowled. “I suppose the other five were heroes?” he suggested
archly.
“Fine men,” the old man said. “Perished in the line of duty. We givem a hero’s
fu’nel—all five in one big service. Biller’s folks tried to rush up the undertaker so
they could get Biller in on it but we saw to it Biller didn’t make it. Would have
been a disgrace.”
My God, the boy thought.
“The only thing Singleton ever did good was to rid us of Biller,” the old man
continued. “Now somebody ought to rid us of Singleton. There he is at Quincy,
living in the laper luxury, laying in a cool bed at no expense, eating up your taxes
and mine. They should have shot himon the spot.”
This was so appalling that Calhoun was speechless.
“Going to keep himthere, they ought to charge himboard,” the old man said.
With a contemptuous glance, the boy walked off. He crossed the street to the
courthouse square, moving at an odd angle in order to put as much distance
between himself and the old fool as quickly as possible. Here benches were
scatterd beneath the trees. He found an unoccupied one and sat down. To the side
of the courthouse steps, several viewers stood admiring the “jail” where Singleton
had been locked with the goat. The pathos of his friend’s situation was borne in on
him with a rush of empathy. He felt himself flung in the privy, the padlock clicked,
he glared between the rotting planks at the fools howling and cavorting outside.
The goat made an obscene noise; he saw that he was confined with the spirit of the
community.
“Six men was shot here,” an odd muffled voice close by said.
The boy jumped.
A small white girl whose tongue was curled in the mouth of a Coca-Cola
bottle was sitting in a patch of sand at his feet, watching himwith a detached gaze.
Her eyes were the same green as the bottle. She was barefooted and had straight
white hair. She withdrew her tongue from the bottle with an explosive sound. “A
bad man did it,” she said.
The boy felt the kind of frustration that accompanies contact with the certainty
of children. “No,” he said, “he was not a bad man.”
The child put her tongue back in the bottle and withdrew it silently, her eyes
on him.
“People were not good to him,” he explained. “They were mean to him. They
were cruel. What would you do if someone were cruel to you?”
“Shoot them,” she said.
“Well, that’s what he did,” Calhoun said, frowning.
She continued to sit there and did not take her eyes off him. Her gaze might
have been the depthless gaze of Partridge itself.
“You people persecuted him and finally drove him mad,” the boy said. “He
wouldn’t buy a badge. Was that a crime? He was the Outsider here and you
couldn’t stand that. One of the fundamental rights of man,” he said, glaring through
the child’s transparent stare, “is the right not to behave like a fool. The right to be
different,” he said hoarsely, “My God. The right to be yourself.”
Without taking her eyes off him, she lifted one of her feet and set it on her
knee.
“He was a bad bad bad man,” she said.
Calhoun got up and walked off, glaring in front of him. His indignation
swathed his vision in a kind of haze. He saw none of the activity around him
distinctly. Two high school girls in bright skirts and jackets swung into his path
and shrilled, “Buy a ticket for the beauty contest tonight. See who’ll be Miss
Partridge Azalea!” He swerved sharply to the side and did not throw them so
much as a glance. Their giggles followed him until he was past the courthouse and
onto the block behind it. He stood there a moment, undecided what he would do
next. He faced a barber shop which looked empty and cool. After a moment he
entered it.
The barber, alone in the shop, raised his head from behind the paper he was
reading. Calhoun asked for a haircut and sat down gratefully in the chair.
The barber was a tall emaciated fellow with eyes that might have faded from
some deeper color. He looked to be a man who had suffered himself. He put the
bib on the boy and stood staring at his round head as if it were a pumpkin he was
wondering how to slice. Then he twirled the chair so that Calhoun faced the
mirror. He was confronted with an image that was round-faced, unremarkablelooking
and innocent. The boy’s expression turned fierce. “Are you eating up this
slop like the rest of them?” he asked belligerently.
“Come again?” the barber said.
“Do the tribal rites going on here improve the barber trade? All these doings,
all these doings,” he said impatiently.
“Well,” the barber said, “last year it was a thousand extra people here and this
year it looks to be more—on account,” he said, “of the tragedy.”
“The tragedy,” the boy repeated and stretched his mouth.
“The six that was shot,” the barber said.
“That tragedy,” the boy said. “And what about the other tragedy—the man who
was persecuted by these idiots until he shot six of them?”
“Oh him,” the barber said.
“Singleton,” the boy said. “Did he patronize your place?”
The barber began clipping his hair. A peculiar expression of disdain had come
over his face at the mention of the name. “Tonight it’s a beauty contest,” he said,
“tomorrow night it’s a band concert, Thursday afternoon it’s a big parade with
Miss.…”
“Did you or didn’t you know Singleton?” Calhoun interrupted.
“Known himwell,” the barber said and shut his mouth.
A tremor went through the boy as he realized that Singleton had probably sat in
the chair he himself was now sitting in. He searched his face in the mirror
desperately for its hidden likeness to the man. Slowly he saw it appear, a secret
message brought to light by the heat of his feelings. “Did he patronize your shop?”
he asked and held his breath for the answer.
“Him and me was related by marriage,” the barber said indignantly, “but he
never come in here. He was too big a skinflint to have his hair cut. He cut his
own.”
“An unpardonable crime,” Calhoun said in a high voice.
“His second cousin married my sister-in-law,” the barber said, “but he never
known me on the street. Pass him as close as I am to you and he’d keep going.
Kept his eye on the ground all the time like he was following a bug.”
“Preoccupied,” the boy muttered. “He doubtless didn’t know you were on the
street.”
“He known it,” the barber said and his mouth curled unpleasantly. “He known
it. I clip hair and he clipped coupons and that was that. I clip hair,” he repeated as
if this sentence had a particularly satisfying ring to his ears, “and he clipped
coupons.”
The typical have-not psychology, Calhoun thought. “Was the Singleton family
once wealthy?” he asked.
“It wasn’t but half of him Singleton,” the barber said, “and the Singleton’s
claimed there wasn’t none of him Singleton. One of the Singleton girls gone off on
a nine-months vacation and come back with him. Then they all died off and left
him their money. It’s no telling what the other half of him is. Something foreign I
would judge.” His tone insinuated more.
“I begin to get the picture,” Calhoun said.
“He ain’t clipping no coupons now,” said the barber.
“No,” Calhoun said and his voice rose, “now he’s suffering. He’s the
scapegoat. He’s laden with the sins of the community. Sacrificed for the guilt of
others.”
The barber paused, his mouth partway open. After a moment he said in a more
respectful voice, “Reverend, you got himwrong. He wasn’t a church-going man.”
The boy reddened. “I’mnot a church-going man myself,” he said.
The barber seemed stopped again. He stood holding the scissors uncertainly.
“He was an individualist,” Calhoun said. “A man who would not allow
himself to be pressed into the mold of his inferiors. A non-conformist. He was a
man of depth living among caricatures and they finally drove him mad, unleashed
all his violence on themselves. Observe,” he continued, “that they didn’t try him.
They simply had him committed at once to Quincy. Why? Because,” he said, “a
trial would have brought out his essential innocence and the real guilt of the
community.”
The barber’s face lightened. “You’re a lawyer, ain’t you?” he asked.
“No,” the boy said sullenly. “I’ma writer.”
“Ohhh,” the barber murmured. “I known it must be something like that.” After
a moment he said, “What you written?”
“He never married?” Calhoun went on rudely. “He lived alone in the Singleton
place in the country?”
“What there was of it,” the barber said. “He wouldn’t have spent a nickel to
keep it fromfalling down and no woman wouldn’t have had him. That was the one
thing he always had to pay for,” he said and made a vulgar noise in his cheek.
“You know because you were always there,” the boy said, barely able to
control his disgust for this bigot.
“Naw,” the barber said, “it was just common knowledge. I clip hair,” he said,
“but I don’t live like a hog, I got plumbing in my house and a refrigerator that spits
ice cubes into my wife’s hand.”
“He was not a materialist,” Calhoun said. “There were things that meant more
to himthan plumbing. Independence, for instance.”
“Ha,” the barber snorted. “He wasn’t so independent. Once lightning almost
struck him and those that saw it said you should have seen him run. Took off like
bees were swarming in his pants. They liked to died laughing,” and he gave a
hyena-like laugh himself and slapped his knee.
“Loathsome,” the boy murmured.
“Another time,” the barber continued, “somebody went out there and put a
dead cat in his well. Somebody was always doing something to see if they could
make himturn loose a little money. Another time…”
Calhoun began fighting his way out of the bib as if it were a net he was caught
in. When he was free of it, he thrust his hand in his pocket and brought out a dollar
which he flung on the startled barber’s shelf. Then he made for the door, letting it
slambehind himin judgment on the place.
The walk back to his aunts’ did not calm him. The colors of the azaleas had
deepened with the approach of sundown and the trees rustled protectively over the
old houses. No one here had a thought for Singleton, who lay on a cot in a filthy
ward at Quincy. The boy felt now in a concrete way the force of his innocence,
and he thought that to do justice to all the man had suffered, he would have to
write more than a simple article. He would have to write a novel; he would have
to show, not say, how primary injustice operated. Preoccupied with this, he went
four doors past his aunts’ house and had to turn and go back.
His Aunt Bessie met him at the door and drew him into the hall. “Told you
we’d have a sweet surprise for you!” she said, pulling him by the arm into the
parlor.
On the sofa sat a rangy-looking girl in a lime-green dress. “You remember
Mary Elizabeth,” his Aunt Mattie said, “—the cute little trick you took to the
picture show once when you were here.” Through his rage he recognized the girl
who had been reading under the tree. “Mary Elizabeth is home for her spring
holidays,” his Aunt Mattie said. “Mary Elizabeth is a real scholar, aren’t you,
Mary Elizabeth?”
Mary Elizabeth scowled, indicating she was indifferent to whether she was a
real scholar or not. She gave him a look which told him plainly she expected to
enjoy this no more than he did.
His Aunt Mattie gripped the knob of her cane and began to lift herself from her
chair. “We’re going to have supper early,” the other one said, “because Mary
Elizabeth is going to take you to the beauty contest and it begins at seven.”
“Great,” the boy said in a tone that would be lost on them but he hoped not on
Mary Elizabeth.
Throughout the meal he ignored the girl completely. His repartee with his
aunts was markedly cynical but they did not have sense enough to understand his
allusions and laughed like idiots at everything he said. Twice they called him
“Baby Lamb” and the girl smirked. Otherwise she did nothing to suggest she was
enjoying herself. Her round face was still childish behind her glasses. Retarded,
Calhoun thought.
When the meal was over and they were on the way to the beauty contest, they
continued to say nothing to each other. The girl, who was several inches taller
than he, walked slightly in advance of him as if she would like to lose him on the
way, but after two blocks she stopped abruptly and began to rummage in a large
grass bag she carried. She took out a pencil and held it between her teeth while
she continued to rummage. After a minute she brought up from the bottom of the
bag two tickets and a stenographer’s note pad. With these out, she closed the
pocketbook and walked on.
“Are you going to take notes?” Calhoun inquired in a tone heavy with irony.
The girl looked around as if trying to identify the speaker. “Yes,” she said,
“I’mgoing to take notes.”
“You appreciate this sort of thing?” Calhoun asked in the same tone. “You
enjoy it?”
“It makes me vomit,” she said, “I’m going to finish it off with one swift
literary kick.”
The boy looked at her blankly.
“Don’t let me interfere with your pleasure in it,” she said, “but this whole
place is false and rotten to the core.” Her voice came with a hiss of indignation.
“They prostitute azaleas!”
Calhoun was astounded. After a moment he recovered himself. “It takes no
great mind to come to that conclusion,” he said haughtily. “What requires insight is
finding a way to transcend it.”
“You mean a formto express it in.”
“It comes to the same thing,” he said.
They walked the next two blocks in silence but both appeared shaken. When
the courthouse was in view they crossed the street to it and Mary Elizabeth stuck
the tickets at a boy who stood beside an entrance that had been formed by roping
in the rest of the square. People were beginning to assemble on the grass inside.
“And do we stand here while you take notes?” Calhoun asked.
The girl stopped and faced him. “Look, Baby Lamb,” she said, “you can do
what you please. I’m going up to my father’s office in the building where I can
work. You can stay down here and help select Miss Partridge Azalea if you want
to.”
“I shall come,” he said, controlling himself, “I’d like to observe a great female
writer taking notes.”
“Suit yourself,” she said.
He followed her up the courthouse steps and through a side door. His irritation
was so extreme that he did not realize he had passed through the very door where
Singleton had stood to shoot. They walked through an empty barnlike hall and
silently up a flight of tobacco-stained steps into another barnlike hall. Mary
Elizabeth rooted in the grass bag for a key and then unlocked the door to her
father’s office. They entered a large threadbare room lined with lawbooks. As if
he were an incompetent, the girl dragged two straight chairs from one wall to a
window that overlooked the porch. Then she sat down and stared out, apparently
absorbed at once in the scene below.
Calhoun sat down in the other chair. To annoy her he began to look her over
thoroughly. For what seemed at least five minutes, he did not take his eyes off her
as she leaned with her elbows in the window. He stared at her so long that he was
afraid her image would be etched forever on his retina. Finally he could stand the
silence no longer. “What is your opinion of Singleton?” he asked abruptly.
She raised her head and appeared to look through him. “A Christ-figure,” she
said.
The boy was stunned.
“I mean as myth,” she said scowling. “I’m not a Christian.” She returned her
attention to the scene outside. Below a bugle sounded. “Sixteen girls in bathing
suits are about to appear,” she drawled. “Surely this will be of interest to you?”
“Listen,” Calhoun said fiercely, “get this through your head. I’m not interested
in the damn festival or the damn azalea queen. I’m here only because of my
sympathy for Singleton. I’mgoing to write about him. Possibly a novel.”
“I intend to write a non-fiction study,” the girl said in a tone that made it
evident fiction was beneath her.
They looked at each other with open and intense dislike. Calhoun felt that if he
probed sufficiently he would expose her essential shallowness. “Since our forms
are different,” he said, again with his ironical smile, “we might compare
findings.”
“It’s quite simple,” the girl said. “He was the scapegoat. While Partridge
flings itself about selecting Miss Partridge Azalea, Singleton suffers at Quincy. He
expiates…’”
“I don’t mean your abstract findings,” the boy said. “I mean your concrete
findings. Have you ever seen him? What did he look like? The novelist is not
interested in narrow abstractions—particularly when they’re obvious. He’s…”
“How many novels have you written?” she asked.
“This will be my first,” he said coldly. “Have you ever seen him?”
“No,” she said, “that isn’t necessary for me. What he looks like makes no
difference—whether he has brown eyes or blue—that’s nothing to a thinker.”
“You are probably,” he said, “afraid to look at him. The novelist is never
afraid to look at the real object.”
“I would not be afraid to look at him,” the girl said angrily, “if it were at all
necessary. Whether he has brown eyes or blue is nothing to me.”
“There is more to it,” Calhoun said, “than whether he has brown eyes or blue.
You might find your theories enriched by the sight of him. And I don’t mean by
finding out the color of his eyes. I mean your existential encounter with his
personality. The mystery of personality,” he said, “is what interests the artist. Life
does not abide in abstractions.”
“Then what’s keeping you from going and having a look at him?” she said.
“What are you asking me what he looks like for? Go see for yourself.”
The words fell on his head like a sack of rocks. After a moment he said, “Go
see for yourself? Go see where?”
“At Quincy,” the girl said. “Where do you think?”
“They wouldn’t let me see him,” he said. The suggestion was appalling to him;
for some reason he could not at the moment understand, it struck him as
unthinkable.
“They would if you said you were kin to him,” she said. “It’s only twenty
miles fromhere. What’s to stop you?”
He was about to say, “I’m not kin to him,” but he stopped and reddened
furiously on the edge of the betrayal. They were spiritual kin.
“Go see whether his eyes are brown or blue and have yourself a little old
exis…”
“I take it,” he said, “that if I go you would like to go along? Since you aren’t
afraid to see him.”
The girl paled. “You won’t go,” she said. “You’re not up to the old exis…”
“I will go,” he said, seeing his opportunity to shut her up. “And if you care to
go with me, you can be at my aunts’at nine in the morning. But I doubt,” he added,
“that I’ll see you there.”
She thrust forward her long neck and glared at him. “Oh yes you will,” she
said. “You’ll see me there.”
She returned her attention to the window and Calhoun looked at nothing. Each
seemed sunk suddenly in some mammoth private problem. Raucus cheers came
intermittently from outside. Every few minutes there was music and clapping but
neither took any notice of it, or of each other. Finally the girl pulled away fromthe
window and said, “If you’ve got the general idea, we can leave. I prefer to go
home and read.”
“I had the general idea before I came,” Calhoun said.
* * *
He saw her to her door and when he had left her, his spirits lifted dizzily for an
instant and then collapsed. He knew that the idea of going to see Singleton would
never have occurred to him alone. It would be a torturing experience, but it might
be his salvation. The sight of Singleton in his misery might cause him suffering
sufficient to raise him once and for all from his commercial instincts. Selling was
the only thing he had proved himself good at; yet it was impossible for him to
believe that every man was not created equally an artist if he could but suffer and
achieve it. As for the girl, he doubted if the sight of Singleton would do anything
for her. She had that particular repulsive fanaticism peculiar to smart children—
all brain and no emotion.
He spent a restless night, dreaming in snatches of Singleton. At one point he
dreamed he was driving to Quincy to sell Singleton a refrigerator. When he awoke
in the morning, a slow rain was descending indifferently. He turned his head to the
gray window pane. He could not remember what he had dreamed but he sensed it
had been unpleasant. A vision of the girl’s flat face came to him. He thought of
Quincy and saw rows and rows of low red buildings with rough heads sticking out
of barred windows. He tried to concentrate on Singleton but his mind shied from
the thought. He did not wish to go to Quincy. He remembered that it was a novel
he was going to write. His desire to write a novel had gone down overnight like a
defective tire.
While he lay in bed, the drizzle turned into a steady downpour. The rain might
keep the girl fromcoming, or at least she might think she could use it as an excuse.
He decided to wait until exactly nine o’clock and if she had not shown up by then
to be off. He would not go to Quincy but would go home. It would be better to see
Singleton at a later date when he would perhaps have responded to treatment. He
got up and wrote the girl a note to be left with his aunts, saying he presumed she
had decided, upon consideration, that she was not equal to the experience. It was a
very concise note and he ended it, “Cordially yours.”
She arrived at five minutes to nine and stood dripping in his aunts’ hall, a
tubular bundle of baby-blue plastic from which nothing showed but her face. She
was holding a damp paper sack and her large mouth was twisted in an uncertain
smile. Overnight she had apparently lost some of her self-assurance.
Calhoun was barely able to be polite. His aunts, who thought this was a
romantic outing in the rain, kissed him out the door and stood on the porch
idotically waving their handkerchiefs until he and Mary Elizabeth were in the car
and gone.
The girl was much too big for the small car. She kept shifting about and
twisting inside her raincoat. “The rain has beat the azaleas down,” she observed
in a neutral tone.
Calhoun rudely kept silent. He was trying to obliterate her from his
consciousness so that he could reestablish Singleton there. He had lost Singleton
completely. The rain was coming down in gray swaths. When they reached the
highway, they could barely see across the fields to a faint line of woods. The girl
kept leaning forward, squinting into the opaque windshield. “If a truck were to
come out of that,” she said with a gawkish laugh, “that would be the end of us.”
Calhoun stopped the car. “I’ll be glad to take you back and go on by myself,”
he said.
“I have to go,” she said hoarsely, staring at him. “I have to see him.” Behind
her spectacles, her eyes appeared larger than they should have been and
suspiciously liquid. “I have to face this,” she said.
Roughly, he started the car again.
“You have to prove to yourself that you can stand there and watch a man be
crucified,” she said. “You have to go through it with him. I thought about it all
night.”
“It may give you,” Calhoun muttered, “a more balanced view of life.”
“This is personal,” she said. “You wouldn’t understand,” and she turned her
head to the window.
Calhoun tried to concentrate on Singleton. Feature by feature, he brought the
face together in his mind and each time he had it almost constructed, it fell apart
and he was left with nothing. He drove in silence, at a reckless speed as if he
would like to hit a hole in the road and see the girl go through the windshield.
Every now and then she blew her nose weakly. After fifteen miles or so the rain
slackened and stopped. The treeline on either side of thembecame black and clear
and the fields intensely green. They would have an unmistakable view of the
hospital grounds as soon as these should come in sight.
“Christ only had to take it three hours,” the girl said all at once in a high voice,
“but he’ll be in this place the rest of his life!”
Calhoun cut his eyes toward her. There was a fresh wet line down the side of
her face. He turned his eyes away, awed and furious. “If you can’t stand this,” he
said, “I can still take you home and come back by myself.”
“You wouldn’t come back by yourself,” she said, “and we’re almost there.”
She blew her nose. “I want him to know that somebody takes his side. I want to
say that to himno matter what it does to me.”
Through his rage, the terrible thought occurred to the boy that he would have to
say something to Singleton. What could he say to him in the presence of this
woman? She had shattered the communion between them. “We’ve come to listen I
hope you understand,” he burst out, “I haven’t driven all this way to hear you
startle Singleton with your wisdom. I’ve come to listen to him.”
“We should have brought a tape recorder!” she cried, “then we’d have what he
says all our lives!”
“You don’t have elementary understanding,” Calhoun said, “if you think you
approach a man like this with a tape recorder.”
“Stop!” she shrieked, leaning toward the windshield, “that’s it!”
Calhoun slammed on his brakes and looked forward wildly.
A cluster of low buildings, hardly noticeable, rose like a rich growth of warts
on the hill to their right.
The boy sat helpless while the car, as if of its own volition, turned and headed
toward the entrance. The letters QUINCY STATE HOSPITAL were cut in a concrete
arch which it rolled effortlessly through.
“Abandon hope all ye who enter here,” the girl murmured.
They had to stop within a hundred yards of the gate while a fat white-capped
nurse led a line of patients, straggling like elderly schoolchildren, across the road
in front of them. A snaggle-toothed woman in a candy-striped dress and black
wool hat shook her fist at them, and a baldheaded man waved energetically. A few
threw malevolent looks as the line shuffled off across the green to another
building.
After a moment the car rolled forward again. “Park in front of that center
building,” Mary Elizabeth directed.
“They won’t let us see him,” he mumbled.
“Not if you have anything to do with it,” she said. “Park and let me out. I’ll
handle this.” Her cheek had dried and her voice was businesslike. He parked and
she got out. He watched her disappear into the building, thinking with grim
satisfaction that she would soon turn into a full-grown ogre—false intellect, false
emotions, maximumefficiency, all operating to produce the dominant hair-splitting
Ph.D. Another line of patients passed in the road and several of them pointed at
the small car. Calhoun did not look but he sensed he was being watched. “Hup up
there,” he heard the nurse say.
He looked again and gave a little cry. A gentle face, wrapped around with a
green hand towel, was in his window, smiling toothlessly but with an agonizing
tenderness.
“Get a move on, sweetie,” the nurse said and the face retreated.
The boy rolled his window up rapidly but his heart was wrenched. He saw
again the agonized face in the stocks—the slightly mismatched eyes, the wide
mouth parted in a stifled useless cry. The vision lasted only a moment but when it
passed, he was certain that the sight of Singleton was going to effect a change in
him, that after this visit, some strange tranquility he had not before conceived of
would be his. He sat for ten minutes with his eyes closed, knowing that a
revelation was near and trying to prepare himself for it.
All at once the car door opened and the girl folded herself, panting, in beside
him. Her face was pale. She held up two green permission slips and pointed to the
names written on them: Calhoun Singleton on one, Mary Elizabeth Singleton on the
other. For a moment they stared at the slips, then at each other. Both appeared to
recognize that in their common kinship with him, a kinship with each other was
unavoidable. Generously, Calhoun held out his hand. She shook it. “He’s in the
fifth building to the left,” she said.
They drove to the fifth building and parked. It was a low red brick structure
with barred windows, like all the others except that the outside of it was streaked
with black stains. In one window two hands hung out, palms downward. Mary
Elizabeth opened the paper sack she had brought and began to take out presents for
Singleton. She had brought a box of candy, a carton of cigarettes and three books
—a Modern Library Thus Spake Zarathustra, a paperback Revolt of the Masses,
and a thin decorated volume of Housman. She handed the cigarettes and the candy
to Calhoun and got out of the car with the books herself. She started forward, but
halfway to the door she stopped and put her hand to her mouth. “I can’t take it,”
she murmured.
“Now now,” Calhoun said kindly. He put his hand on her back and gave her a
slight push and she began to move forward again.
They entered a stained linoleum-covered hall where a peculiar odor met them
at once like an invisible official. There was a desk facing the door, behind which
sat a frail harrassed-looking nurse whose eyes darted to right and left as if she
expected ultimately to be hit from behind. Mary Elizabeth handed her the two
green permits. The woman looked at them and groaned. “Go in yonder and wait,”
she said in a weary insult-bearing voice. “He’ll have to be got ready. They
shouldn’t have give you these slips over there. What do they know about what
goes on over here over there and what do them doctors care anyhow? If it was up
to me the ones that don’t cooperate wouldn’t see nobody.”
“We’re his kin,” Calhoun said. “We have every right to see him.”
The nurse threw her head back in a soundless laugh and went off muttering.
Calhoun put his hand on the girl’s back again and guided her into the waiting
room where they sat down close together on a mammoth black leather sofa which
faced an identical piece of furniture five feet away. There was nothing else in the
room but a rickety table in one corner with an empty white vase on it. A barred
window cast squares of damp light on the floor at their feet. There seemed an
intense stillness about them although the place was anything but quiet. From one
end of the building came a continuous mourning sound as delicate as the fluttering
wail of owls; at the other end they heard rocketing peals of laughter. Closer at
hand, a steady montonous cursing broke the silence around it with a machine-like
regularity. Each noise seemed to exist isolated fromevery other.
The two sat together as if they were waiting for some momentous event in their
lives—a marriage or instantaneous deaths. They seemed already joined in a
predestined convergence. At the same instant each made an involuntary motion as
if to run but it was too late. Heavy footsteps were almost at the door and the
machine-like curses were bearing down.
Two burly attendants entered with Singleton spider-like between them. He
was holding his feet high up off the floor so that the atendants had to carry him. It
was from him the curses were coming. He had on a hospital gown of the type that
opens and ties up the back and his feet were stuck in black shoes from which the
laces had been removed. On his head was a black hat, not the kind countrymen
wear, but a black derby hat such as might be worn by a gunman in the movies. The
two attendants came up to the empty sofa from behind and swung him over the
back of it, then still holding him, each passed around the sofa arms and sat down
beside him, grinning. They might have been twins for though one was blond and
the other bald, they had identical looks of good-natured stupidity.
As for Singleton, he fixed Calhoun with his green slightly mismatched eyes.
“Whadaya want with me?” he shrilled. “Speak up! My time is valuable.” They
were almost exactly the eyes that Calhoun had seen in the paper, except that the
penetrating gleamin themhad a slight reptilian quality.
The boy sat mesmerized.
After a moment, Mary Elizabeth said in a slow, hoarse, barely audible voice,
“We came to say we understand.”
The old man’s glare shifted to her and for one instant his eyes remained
absolutely still like the eyes of a treetoad that has sighted its prey. His throat
appeared to swell. “Ahhh,” he said as if he had just swallowed something
pleasant, “eeeee.”
“Mind out now, dad,” one of the attendants said.
“Lemme sit with her,” Singleton said and jerked his arm away from the
attendant, who caught it again at once. “She knows what she wants.”
“Let himsit with her,” the blond attendant said, “she’s his niece.”
“No,” the bald one said, “keep aholt to him. He’s liable to pull off his frock.
You know him.”
But the other one had already let one of his wrists loose and Singleton was
leaning outward toward Mary Elizabeth, straining away from the attendant who
held him. The girl’s eyes were glazed The old man began to make suggestive
noises through his teeth.
“Now now, dad,” the idle attendant said.
“It’s not every girl gets a chance at me,” Singleton said. “Listen here, sister,
I’mwell-fixed. There’s nobody in Partridge I can’t skin. I own the place—as well
as this hotel.” His hand grasped toward her knee.
The girl gave a small stifled cry.
“And I got others elsewhere,” he panted. “You and me are two of a kind. We
ain’t in their class. You’re a queen. I’ll put you on a float!” and at that moment he
got his wrist free and lunged toward her but both attendants sprang after him
instantly. As Mary Elizabeth crouched against Calhoun, the old man jumped
nimbly over the sofa and began to speed around the room. The attendants, their
arms and legs held wide apart to catch him, tried to close in on him from either
side. They almost had him when he kicked off his shoes and leaped between them
onto the table, sending the empty vase shattering to the floor. “Look girl!” he
shrilled and began to pull the hospital gown over his head.
Mary Elizabeth was already dashing out the room and Calhoun ran behind her
and thrust open the door just in time to prevent her crashing into it. They
scrambled into the car and the boy drove it away as if his heart were the motor
and would never go fast enough. The sky was bone-white and the slick highway
stretched before them like a piece of the earth’s exposed nerve. After five miles
Calhoun pulled the car to the side of the road and stopped from exhaustion. They
sat silently, looking at nothing until finally they turned and looked at each other.
There each saw at once the likeness of their kinsman and flinched. They looked
away and then back, as if with concentration they might find a more tolerable
image. To Calhoun, the girl’s face seemed to mirror the nakedness of the sky. In
despair he leaned closer until he was stopped by a miniature visage which rose
incorrigibly in her spectacles and fixed him where he was. Round, innocent,
undistinguished as an iron link, it was the face whose gift of life had pushed
straight forward to the future to raise festival after festival. Like a master
salesman, it seemed to have been waiting there fromall time to claimhim.