FRANCIS MARION TARWATER’S uncle had been dead for only half a day when the
boy got too drunk to finish digging his grave and a Negro named Buford Munson,
who had come to get a jug filled, had to finish it and drag the body from the
breakfast table where it was still sitting and bury it in a decent and Christian way,
with the sign of its Saviour at the head of the grave and enough dirt on top to keep
the dogs from digging it up. Buford had come along about noon, and when he left
at sundown, the boy, Tarwater, had never returned fromthe still.
The old man had been Tarwater’s great uncle, or said he was, and they had
always lived together so far as the child knew. His uncle had said he was seventy
years of age at the time he had rescued himand undertaken to bring him up; he was
eighty-four when he died. Tarwater figured this made his own age fourteen. His
uncle had taught him figures, reading, writing, and history beginning with Adam
expelled from the Garden and going on down through the presidents to Herbert
Hoover and on in speculation toward the Second Coming and the Day of
Judgment. Besides giving him a good education, he had rescued him from his only
other connection, old Tarwater’s nephew, a school teacher who had no child of
his own at the time and wanted this one of his dead sister’s to raise according to
his own ideas. The old man was in a position to know what his ideas were.
He had lived for three months in the nephew’s house on what he had thought at
the time was Charity but what he said he had found out was not Charity or anything
like it. All the time he had lived there, the nephew had secretly been making a
study of him. The nephew, who had taken him in under the name of Charity, had at
the same time been creeping into his soul by the back door, asking him questions
that meant more than one thing, planting traps around the house and watching him
fall into them, and finally coming up with a written study of him for a school
teacher magazine. The stench of his behavior had reached heaven and the Lord
Himself had rescued the old man. He had sent hima rage of vision, had told himto
fly with the orphan boy to the farthest part of the backwoods and raise him up to
justify his Redemption. The Lord had assured him a long life and he had snatched
the child from under the school teacher’s nose and taken him to live in a clearing
that he had title to for his lifetime.
Eventually Rayber, the school teacher, had discovered where they were and
had come out to the clearing to get the boy back. He had had to leave his car on the
dirt road and walk a mile through the woods, on a path that appeared and
disappeared, before he came to the corn patch with the gaunt two-story shack
standing in the middle of it. The old man had been fond of recalling for Tarwater
the red, sweating, bitten face of his nephew bobbing up and down through the corn
and behind it the pink, flowered hat of a welfare woman he had brought along with
him. The corn was planted up to two feet from the porch step, and as the nephew
came out of it, the old man appeared in the door with his shotgun and said that he
would shoot any foot that touched his step, and the two stood facing each other
while the welfare woman bristled out of the corn like a peahen upset on the nest.
The old man said if it hadn’t been for the welfare woman his nephew wouldn’t
have taken a step, but she stood there waiting, pushing back the wisps of dyed red
hair that were plastered on her long forehead. Both their faces were scratched and
bleeding from thorn bushes, and the old man recalled a switch of blackberry bush
hanging fromthe sleeve of the welfare woman’s blouse. She only had to let out her
breath slowly as if she were releasing the last patience on earth and the nephew
lifted his foot and set it down on the step and the old man shot him in the leg. The
two of them had scuttled off, making a disappearing rattle in the corn, and the
woman had screamed, “You knew he was crazy!”; but when they came out of the
corn on the other side, old Tarwater had noted fromthe upstairs window where he
had run that she had her arm around him and was holding him up while he hopped
into the woods; and later he learned that he had married her though she was twice
his age and he could only possibly get one child out of her. She had never let him
come back again.
The morning the old man died, he came down and cooked the breakfast as
usual and died before he got the first spoonful to his mouth. The downstairs of
their shack was all kitchen, large and dark, with a wood stove in the center of it
and a board table drawn up to the stove. Sacks of feed and mash were stacked in
the corners, and scrap metal, wood shavings, old rope, ladders, and other tinder
were wherever he or Tarwater had let themfall. They had slept in the kitchen until
a wild cat sprang in the window one night and frightened himinto carrying the bed
upstairs where there were two empty rooms. He prophesied at the time that the
stairsteps would take ten years off his life. At the moment of his death, he had sat
down to his breakfast and lifted his knife in one square red hand halfway to his
mouth and then, with a look of complete astonishment, he had lowered it until the
hand rested on the edge of the plate and tilted it up off the table.
He was a bull-like old man with a short head set directly into his shoulders
and silver protruding eyes that looked like two fish straining to get out of a net of
red threads. He had on a putty-colored hat with the brim turned up all around and
over his undershirt a gray coat that had once been black. Tarwater, sitting across
the table fromhim, saw red ropes appear in his face and a tremor pass over him. It
was like the tremor of a quake that had begun at his heart and run outward and was
just reaching the surface. His mouth twisted down sharply on one side and he
remained exactly as he was, perfectly balanced, his back a good six inches from
the chair back and his stomach caught just under the edge of the table. His eyes,
dead silver, were focused on the boy across fromhim.
Tarwater felt the tremor transfer itself and run lightly over him. He knew the
old man was dead without touching him and he continued to sit across the table
from the corpse, finishing his breakfast in a kind of sullen embarrassment, as if he
were in the presence of a new personality and couldn’t think of anything to say.
Finally he said in a querulous tone, “Just hold your horses. I already told you I
would do it right.” The voice sounded like a stranger’s voice, as if the death had
changed himinstead of the old man.
He got up and took his plate out the back door and set it down on the bottom
step, and two long-legged black game roosters tore across the yard and finished
what was on it. He sat down on a long pine box on the back porch, and his hands
began absently to unravel a length of rope, while his long cross-shaped face stared
ahead beyond the clearing over woods that ran in gray and purple folds until they
touched the light-blue fortress line of trees set against the empty morning sky.
The clearing was not simply off the dirt road but off the wagon track and
footpath, and the nearest neighbors, colored not white, still had to walk through
the woods, pushing plum branches out of their way to get to it. The old man had
started an acre of cotton to the left and had run it beyond the fence line almost up
to the house on one side. The two strands of barbed wire ran through the middle of
the patch. A line of fog, hump-shaped, was creeping toward it, ready like a white
hound dog to crouch under and crawl across the yard.
“I’m going to move that fence,” Tarwater said. “I ain’t going to have my fence
in the middle of a field.” The voice was loud and still strange and disagreeable
and he finished the rest of his thought in his head: because this place is mine now
whether I own it or not because I’m here and nobody can’t get me off. If any
school teacher comes here to claimthe property, I’ll kill him.
He had on a faded pair of overalls and a gray hat pulled down over his ears
like a cap. He followed his uncle’s custom of never taking off his hat except in
bed. He had always followed his uncle’s customs up to this date but: if I want to
move that fence before I bury him, there wouldn’t be a soul to hinder me, he
thought; no voice will be lifted.
“Bury him first and get it over with,” the loud stranger’s disagreeable voice
said, and he got up and went to look for the shovel.
The pine box he had been sitting on was his uncle’s coffin but he didn’t intend
to use it. The old man was too heavy for a thin boy to hoist over the side of a box,
and though old Tarwater had built it himself a few years before, he had said that if
it wasn’t feasible to get him into it when the time came, then just to put him in the
hole as he was, only to be sure the hole was deep. He wanted it ten foot, he said,
not just eight. He had worked on the box a long time, and when he finished it he
had scratched on the top, MASON TARWATER, WITH GOD, and had climbed
into it where it stood on the back porch and had lain there for some time, nothing
showing but his stomach which rose over the top like overleavened bread. The
boy had stood at the side of the box, studying him. “This is the end of us all,” the
old man said with satisfaction, his gravel voice hearty in the coffin.
“It’s too much of you for the box,” Tarwater said. “I’ll have to sit on the lid or
wait until you rot a little.”
“Don’t wait,” old Tarwater had said. “Listen. If it ain’t feasible to use the box
when the time comes, if you can’t lift it or whatever, just get me in the hole, but I
want it deep. I want it ten foot, not just eight—ten. You can roll me to it if nothing
else. I’ll roll. Get two boards and set themdown the steps and start me rolling and
dig where I stop and don’t let me roll over into it until it’s deep enough. Prop me
with some bricks so I won’t roll into it and don’t let the dogs nudge me over the
edge before it’s finished. You better pen up the dogs,” he said.
“What if you die in bed?” the boy asked. “How’m I going to get you down the
stairs?”
“I ain’t going to die in bed,” the old man said. “As soon as I hear the summons,
I’m going to run downstairs. I’ll get as close to the door as I can. If I should get
stuck up there, you’ll have to roll me down the stairs, that’s all.”
“My Lord,” the child said.
The old man sat up in the box and brought his fist down on the edge of it.
“Listen,” he said. “I never asked much of you. I taken you and raised you and
saved you from that ass in town and now all I’m asking in return is when I die to
get me in the ground where the dead belong and set up a cross over me to show
I’mthere. That’s all in the world I’masking you to do.”
“I’ll be doing good if I get you in the ground,” Tarwater said. “I’ll be too wore
out set up any cross. I ain’t bothering with trifles.”
“Trifles!” his uncle hissed. “You’ll learn what a trifle is on the day those
crosses are gathered! Burying the dead right may be the only honor you ever do
yourself. I brought you out here to raise you a Christian,” he hollered, “and I’m
damned if you won’t be one!”
“If I don’t have the strength to do it,” the child said, watching him with a
careful detachment, “I’ll notify my uncle in town and he can come out and take
care of you. The school teacher,” he drawled, observing that the pockmarks in his
uncle’s face had already turned pale against the purple, “he’ll ’tend to you.”
The threads that restrained the old man’s eyes thickened. He gripped both
sides of the coffin and pushed forward as if he were going to drive it off the
porch. “He’d burn me,” he said hoarsely. “He’d have me cremated in an oven and
scatter my ashes. ‘Uncle,’ he said to me, ‘you’re a type that’s almost extinct!’
He’d be willing to pay the undertaker to burn me to be able to scatter my ashes,”
he said. “He don’t believe in the Resurrection. He don’t believe in the Last Day.
He don’t believe in…”
“The dead don’t bother with particulars,” the boy interrupted.
The old man grabbed the front of his overalls and pulled him up against the
side of the box so that their faces were not two inches apart. “The world was
made for the dead. Think of all the dead there are,” he said and then, as if he had
conceived the answer for all insolence, he said, “There’s a million times more
dead than living and the dead are dead a million times longer than the living are
alive!” and he released himwith a laugh.
The boy had shown only by a slight quiver in the eyes that he was shaken by
this, and after a minute he had said, “The school teacher is my uncle. The only
blood connection I’ll have and a living man and if I wanted to go to him, I’d go,
now.”
The old man looked at him silently for what seemed a full minute. Then he
slammed his hands on the sides of the box and roared, “Whomthe plague beckons,
to the plague! Whom the sword, to the sword! Whom fire, to fire!” and the child
trembled visibly.
A living man, he thought as he went to get the shovel, but he better not come
out here and try to get me off this property because I’ll kill him. Go to him and be
dammed, his uncle had said. I’ve saved you from him this far and if you go to him
the minute I’min the ground, there’s nothing I can do about it.
The shovel lay against the side of the hen house. “I’ll never set my foot in the
city again,” Tarwater said. “I’ll never go to him. Him nor nobody else will ever
get me off this place.” He decided to dig the grave under the fig tree because the
old man would be good for the figs. The ground was sandy on top and solid brick
underneath and the shovel made a clanging sound when he struck it in the sand.
Two hundred pounds of dead mountain to bury, he thought, and stood with one foot
on the shovel, leaning forward, studying the white sky through the leaves of the
tree. It would take all day to get a hole big enough out of this rock and the school
teacher would burn himin a minute.
Tarwater had never seen the school teacher but he had seen his child, a boy
who resembled old Tarwater himself. The old man had been so shocked by the
likeness that the time he and Tarwater had gone there, he had only stood in the
door, staring at the little boy and rolling his tongue around outside his mouth like
an old idiot. That had been the first and only time the old man had seen the boy.
“Three months there,” he would say. “It shames me. Betrayed for three months in
the house of my own kin, and if when I’m dead you want to turn me over to my
betrayer and see my body burned, go ahead. Go ahead, boy!” he had shouted,
sitting up splotch-faced in his box. “Go ahead and let him burn me but watch out
for the crab that begins to grip your neck after that!” and he had clawed his hand in
the air to show Tarwater his grip. “I been leavened by the yeast he don’t believe
in,” he said, “and I won’t be burned. And when I’m gone you’ll be better off in
these woods by yourself with just as much light as that dwarf sun wants to let in
than you would be in the city with him!”
The white fog had eased through the yard and disappeared into the next bottom
and now the air was clear and blank. “The dead are poor,” Tarwater said in the
voice of the stranger. “You can’t be any poorer than dead. He’ll have to take what
he gets.” Nobody to bother me, he thought. Ever. No hand uplifted to hinder me
from anything. A sand-colored hound beat its tail on the ground nearby and a few
black chickens scratched in the raw clay he was turning up. The sun had slipped
over the blue line of trees and, circled by a haze of yellow, was moving slowly
across the sky. “Now I can do anything I want to,” he said, softening the stranger’s
voice so that he could stand it. Could kill off all those chickens if I had a mind to,
he thought, watching the worthless black game bantams that his uncle had been
fond of keeping.
“He favored a lot of foolishness,” the stranger said. “The truth is he was
childish. Why, that school teacher never did him any harm. You take, all he did
was to watch him and write down what he seen and heard and put it in a paper for
school teachers to read. Now what was wrong in that? Why nothing. Who cares
what a school teacher reads? And the old fool acted like he had been killed in his
very soul. Well, he wasn’t so near dead then as he thought he was. Lived on
fifteen years and raised up a boy to bury him, suitable to his own taste.”
As Tarwater slashed at the ground with the shovel, the stranger’s voice took
on a kind of restrained fury and he kept repeating, “You got to bury him whole and
completely by hand and that school teacher would burn him in a minute.” After he
had dug for an hour or more, the grave was only a foot deep, not as deep yet as the
corpse. He sat down on the edge of it for a while. The sun was like a furious
white blister in the sky. “The dead are a heap more trouble than the living,” the
stranger said. “That school teacher wouldn’t consider for a minute that on the last
day all the bodies marked by crosses will be gathered. In the rest of the world
they do things different than what you been taught.”
“I been there oncet,” Tarwater muttered. “Nobody has to tell me.”
His uncle two or three years before had gone there to call on the lawyers to try
and get the property unentailed so that it would skip the school teacher and go to
Tarwater. Tarwater had sat at the lawyer’s twelfth-story window and looked
down into the pit of the city street while his uncle transacted the business. On the
way from the railroad station he had walked tall in the mass of moving metal and
concrete speckled with the very small eyes of people. The glitter of his own eyes
was shaded under the stiff rooflike brim of a new gray hat balanced perfectly
straight on his buttressing ears. Before coming he had read facts in the almanac
and he knew that there were 60,000 people here who were seeing him for the first
time. He wanted to stop and shake hands with each of them and say his name was
Francis M. Tarwater and that he was here only for the day to accompany his uncle
on business at a lawyer’s. His head jerked backwards after each passing figure
until they began to pass too thickly and he observed that their eyes didn’t grab at
you like the eyes of country people. Several of them bumped into him and this
contact that should have made an acquaintance for life made nothing because the
hulks shoved on with ducked heads and muttered apologies that he would have
accepted if they had waited. At the lawyer’s window, he had knelt down and let
his face hang out upside-down over the floating speckled street moving like a
river of tin below and had watched the glints on it from the sun which drifted pale
in a pale sky. You have to do something particular here to make them look at you,
he thought. They ain’t going to look at you just because God made you. When I
come for good, he said to himself, I’ll do something to make every eye stick on me
for what I done; and leaning forward, he saw his hat drop down gently, lost and
casual, dallied slightly by the breeze on its way to be smashed in the traffic
below. He clutched at his bare head and fell back inside the room.
His uncle was in argument with the lawyer, both hitting the desk that separated
them, bending their knees and hitting their fists at the same time. The lawyer, a tall
dome-headed man with an eagle’s nose, kept repeating in a restrained shriek, “But
I didn’t make the will. I didn’t make the law,” and his uncle’s voice grated, “I
can’t help it. My daddy wouldn’t have wanted it this way. It has to skip him. My
daddy wouldn’t have seen a fool inherit his property. That’s not how he intended
it.”
“My hat is gone,” Tarwater said.
The lawyer threw himself backwards into his chair and screaked it toward
Tarwater and saw him without interest from pale-blue eyes and screaked it
forward again and said to his uncle, “There’s nothing I can do. You’re wasting
your time and mine. You might as well resign yourself to this will.”
“Listen,” old Tarwater said, “at one time I thought I was finished, old and sick
and about to die and no money, nothing, and I accepted his hospitality because he
was my closest blood connection and you could have called it his duty to take me,
only I thought it was Charity, I thought…”
“I can’t help what you thought or did or what your connection thought or did,”
the lawyer said and closed his eyes.
“My hat fell,” Tarwater said.
“I’m only a lawyer,” the lawyer said, letting his glance rove over the lines of
clay-colored books of law that fortressed his office.
“A car is liable to have run over it by now.”
“Listen,” his uncle said, “all the time he was studying me for a paper he was
writing. Only had me there to study me for this paper. Taking secret tests on me,
his own kin, looking into my soul like a Peeping Tom, and then says to me, ‘Uncle,
you’re a type that’s almost extinct!’ Almost extinct!” the old man piped, barely
able to force a thread of sound fromhis throat. “You see how extinct I am!”
The lawyer shut his eyes and smiled into one cheek.
“Other lawyers,” the old man growled, and they had left and visited three
more without stopping, and Tarwater had counted eleven men who might have had
on his hat or might not. Finally when they came out of the fourth lawyer’s office,
they sat down on the window ledge of a bank building and his uncle felt in his
pocket for some biscuits he had brought and handed one to Tarwater. The old man
unbuttoned his coat and allowed his stomach to ease forward and rest on his lap
while he ate. His face worked wrathfully; the skin between the pockmarks grew
pink and then purple and then white and the pockmarks appeared to jump from one
spot to another. Tarwater was very pale and his eyes glittered with a peculiar
hollow depth. He had an old work handkerchief tied around his head, knotted at
the four corners. He didn’t observe the passing people who observed him now.
“Thank God, we’re finished here and can go home,” he muttered.
“We ain’t finished here,” the old man said and got up abruptly and started
down the street.
“My Jesus,” the boy hissed, jumping to catch up with him. “Can’t we sit down
for one minute? Ain’t you got any sense? They all tell you the same thing. It’s only
one law and it’s nothing you can do about it. I got sense enough to get that; why
ain’t you? What’s the matter with you?”
The old man strode on with his head thrust forward as if he were smelling out
an enemy.
“Where we going?” Tarwater asked after they had walked out of the business
streets and were passing between rows of gray bulbous houses with sooty porches
that overhung the sidewalks. “Listen,” he said, hitting his uncle’s hip, “I never ast
to come.”
“You would have asked to come soon enough,” the old man muttered. “Get
your fill now.”
“I never ast for no fill. I never ast to come at all. I’m here before I knew this
here was here.”
“Just remember,” the old man said, “just remember that I told you to remember
when you ast to come that you never liked it when you were here,” and they kept
on going, crossing one length of sidewalk after another, row after row of
overhanging houses with half-open doors that let a little dried light fall on the
stained passageways inside. Finally they came out into another section where the
houses were squat and almost identical and each one had a square of grass in front
of it like a dog gripping a stolen steak. After a few blocks, Tarwater dropped
down on the sidewalk and said, “I ain’t going a step further.”
“I don’t even know where I’mgoing and I ain’t going no further!” he shouted at
his uncle’s heavy figure which didn’t stop or look back. In a second he jumped up
and followed him again, thinking: If anything happened to him, I would be lost
here.
The old man kept straining forward as if his blood scent were leading him
closer and closer to the place where his enemy was hiding. He suddenly turned up
the short walk of a pale-yellow house and moved rigidly to the white door, his
heavy shoulders hunched as if he were going to crash through like a bulldozer. He
struck the wood with his fist, ignoring a polished brass knocker. By the time
Tarwater came up behind him, the door had opened and a small pink-faced fat boy
stood in it. He was a white-haired child and wore steel-rimmed spectacles and
had pale-silver eyes like the old man’s. The two stood staring at each other, old
Tarwater with his fist raised and his mouth open and his tongue lolling idiotically
from side to side. For a second the little fat boy seemed shocked still with
astonishment. Then he guffawed. He raised his fist and opened his mouth and let
his tongue roll out as far as it would go. The old man’s eyes seemed about to
strain out of their sockets.
“Tell your father,” he roared, “that I’mnot extinct!”
The little boy shook as if a blast had hit him and pushed the door almost shut,
hiding himself all but one spectacled eye. The old man grabbed Tarwater by the
shoulder and swung him around and pushed him down the path away from the
place.
He had never been back there again, never seen his cousin again, never seen
the school teacher at all, and he hoped to God, he told the stranger digging the
grave along with him now, that he would never see him, though he had nothing
against him and he would dislike to kill him, but if he came out here, messing with
what was none of his business except by law, then he would be obliged to.
“Listen,” the stranger said, “what would he want to come out here for—where
there’s nothing?”
Tarwater began to dig again and didn’t answer. He didn’t search out the
stranger’s face, but he knew by now it was sharp and friendly and wise, shadowed
under a stiff broad-brimmed hat. He had lost his dislike for the sound of the voice.
Only, every now and then it sounded like a stranger’s voice to him. He began to
feel that he was only just now meeting himself, as if, as long as his uncle had
lived, he had been deprived of his own acquaintance.
“I ain’t denying the old man was a good one,” his new friend said, “but like
you said: you can’t be any poorer than dead. They have to take what they can get.
His soul is off this mortal earth now and his body is not going to feel the pinch—
of fire or anything else.”
“It was the last day he was thinking of,” Tarwater said.
“Well now,” the stranger said, “don’t you think any cross you set up in the year
1954 or 5 or 6 would be rotted out by the year the Day of Judgment comes in?
Rotted to as much dust as his ashes if you reduced him to ashes? And lemme ast
you this: what’s God going to do with sailors drowned at sea that the fish have et
and the fish that et them et by other fish and they et by yet others? And what about
people that get burned up naturally in house fires? Burnt up one way or another or
lost in machines until they’re a pulp? And all these sojers blasted to nothing?
What about all these naturally left without a piece to fit a piece?”
“If I burnt him,” Tarwater said, “it wouldn’t be natural, it would be
deliberate.”
“Oh, I see,” the stranger said. “It ain’t the Day of Judgment for him you’re
worried about, it’s the Day of Judgment for you.”
“That’s my bidnis,” Tarwater said.
“I ain’t buttin into your bidnis,” the stranger said. “It don’t mean a thing to me.
You’re left by yourself in this empty place. Forever by yourself in the empty place
with just as much light as that dwarf sun wants to let in. You don’t mean a thing to
a soul as far as I can see.”
“Redeemed,” Tarwater muttered.
“Do you smoke?” the stranger asked.
“Smoke if I want to and don’t if I don’t,” Tarwater said. “Bury if need be and
don’t if don’t.”
“Go take a look at himand see if he’s fell off his chair,” his friend suggested.
Tarwater let the shovel drop in the grave and returned to the house. He opened
the front door a crack and put his face to it. His uncle glared slightly to the side of
him, like a judge intent upon some terrible evidence. The child shut the door
quickly and went back to the grave. He was cold in spite of the sweat that stuck
his shirt to his back.
The sun was directly overhead, apparently dead still, holding its breath
waiting out the noontime. The grave was about two feet deep. “Ten foot now,
remember,” the stranger said and laughed. “Old men are selfish. You got to expect
the least from them. The least from everybody,” he added, and let out a flat sigh
that was like a gust of sand raised and dropped suddenly by the wind.
Tarwater looked up and saw two figures cutting across the field, a colored
man and woman, each dangling an empty vinegar jug by a finger. The woman, tall
and Indian-like, had on a green sunhat. She stooped under the fence without
pausing and came on across the yard toward the grave; the man held the wire
down and swung his leg over and followed at her elbow. They kept their eyes on
the hole and stopped at the edge of it, looking down into the raw ground with
shocked satisfied expressions. The man, Buford, had a crinkled, burnt-rag face,
darker than his hat. “Old man passed,” he said.
The woman lifted her head and let out a slow sustained wail, piercing and
formal. She set her jug down on the ground and crossed her arms and then lifted
themin the air and wailed again.
“Tell her to shut up that,” Tarwater said. “I’m in charge here now and I don’t
want no nigger-mourning.”
“I seen his spirit for two nights,” she said. “Seen him two nights and he was
unrested.”
“He ain’t been dead but since this morning,” Tarwater said. “If you all want
your jugs filled, give themto me and dig while I’mgone.”
“He’d been perdicting his passing for many years,” Buford said. “She seen
him in her dream several nights and he wasn’t rested. I known him well. I known
himvery well indeed.”
“Poor sweet sugar boy,” the woman said to Tarwater, “what you going to do
here now by yourself in this lonesome place?”
“Mind by bidnis,” the boy growled, jerking the jug out of her hand, and started
off so quickly that he almost fell. He stalked across the back field toward the rim
of trees that surrounded the clearing.
The birds had gone into the deep woods to escape the noon sun and one thrush,
hidden some distance ahead of him, called the same four notes again and again,
stopping each time after them to make a silence. Tarwater began to walk faster,
then he began to lope, and in a second he was running like something hunted,
sliding down slopes waxed with pine needles and grasping the limbs of trees to
pull himself, panting, up the slippery inclines. He crashed through a wall of
honeysuckle and leapt across a sandy stream bed that was almost dry now and fell
down against the high clay bank that formed the back wall of a cove where the old
man had kept his extra liquor hidden. He hid it in a hollow of the bank, covered
with a large stone. Tarwater began to fight at the stone to pull it away, while the
stranger stood over his shoulder, panting, “He was crazy! He was crazy! That’s
the long and short of it. He was crazy!” Tarwater got the stone away and pulled
out a black jug and sat down against the bank with it. “Crazy!” the stranger hissed,
collapsing by his side. The sun appeared, edging its way secretly behind the tops
of the trees that rose over the hiding place.
“A man, seventy years of age, to bring a baby out into the backwoods to raise
him right! Suppose he had died when you were four years old? Could you have
toted mash to the still then and supported yourself? I never heard of no four-yearold
running a still.
“Never did I hear of that,” he continued. “You weren’t anything to him but
something that would grow big enough to bury him when the time came, and now
that he’s dead, he’s shut of you but you got two hundred pounds of him to carry
below the face of the earth. And don’t think he wouldn’t heat up like a coal stove
to see you take a drop of liquor,” he added. “He might say it would hurt you but
what he would mean was you might get so much you wouldn’t be in no fit
condition to bury him. He said he brought you out here to raise you according to
principle and that was the principle: that you should be fit when the time came to
bury himso he would have a cross to mark where he was at.
“Well,” he said in a softer tone, when the boy had taken a long swallow from
the black jug, “a little won’t interfere. Moderation never hurt no one.”
A burning arm slid down Tarwater’s throat as if the devil were already
reaching inside him to finger his soul. He squinted at the angry sun creeping
behind the topmost fringe of the trees.
“Take it easy,” his friend said. “Do you remember them nigger gospel singers
you saw one time, all drunk, all singing, all dancing around that black Ford
automobile? Jesus, they wouldn’t have been near so glad they were redeemed if
they hadn’t had that liquor in them. I wouldn’t pay too much attention to my
Redemption if I was you,” he said. “Some people take everything too hard.”
Tarwater drank more slowly. He had been drunk only one time before and that
time his uncle had beat him with a board for it, saying liquor would dissolve a
child’s gut; another of his lies because his gut had not dissolved.
“It should be clear to you,” his kind friend said, “how all your life you been
tricked by that old man. You could have been a city slicker for the last ten years.
Instead, you been deprived of any company but his, you been living in a two-story
barn in the middle of this earth’s bald patch, following behind a mule and plow
since you were seven. And how do you know the education he give you is true to
the fact? Maybe he taught you a system of figures nobody else uses? How do you
know that two added to two makes four? Four added to four makes eight? Maybe
other people don’t use that system. How do you know if there was an Adam or if
Jesus eased your situation any when He redeemed you? Or how you know if He
actually done it? Nothing but that old man’s word and it ought to be obvious to you
by now that he was crazy. And as for Judgment Day,” the stranger said, “every day
is Judgment Day.
“Ain’t you old enough to have learnt that yet for yourself? Don’t everything
you do, everything you have ever done, work itself out right or wrong before your
eye and usually before the sun has set? Have you ever got by with anything? No
you ain’t nor ever thought you would,” he said. “You might as well drink all that
liquor since you’ve already drunk so much. Once you pass the moderation mark
you’ve passed it, and that gyration you feel working down from the top of your
brain,” he said, “that’s the Hand of God laying a blessing on you. He has given
you your release. That old man was the stone before your door and the Lord has
rolled it away. He ain’t rolled it quite far enough yet, of course. You got to finish
up yourself but He’s done the main part. Praise Him.”
Tarwater had ceased to have any feeling in his legs. He dozed for a while, his
head hanging to the side and his mouth open and the liquor trickling slowly down
the side of his overalls where the jug had overturned in his lap. Eventually there
was just a drip at the neck of the bottle, forming and filling and dropping, silent
and measured and sun-colored. The bright, even sky began to fade, coarsening
with clouds until every shadow had gone in. He woke with a wrench forward, his
eyes focusing and unfocusing on something that looked like burnt rag hanging close
to his face.
Buford said, “This ain’t no way for you to act. Old man don’t deserve this.
There’s no rest until the dead is buried.” He was squatting on his heels, one hand
gripped around Tarwater’s arm. “I gone yonder to the door and seen him sitting
there at the table, not even laid out on a cooling board. He ought to be laid out and
have some salt on his bosomif you mean to keep himovernight.”
The boy’s lids pinched together to hold the image steady and in a second he
made out the two small red blistered eyes. “He deserves to lie in a grave that fits
him,” Buford said. “He was deep in this life, he was deep in Jesus’ misery.”
“Nigger,” the child said, working his strange swollen tongue, “take your hand
off me.”
Buford lifted his hand. “He needs to be rested,” he said.
“He’ll be rested all right when I get through with him,” Tarwater said vaguely.
“Go on and lea’ me to my bidnis.”
“Nobody going to bother you,” Buford said, standing up. He waited a minute,
bent, looking down at the limp figure sprawled against the bank. The boy’s head
was tilted backwards over a root that jutted out of the clay wall. His mouth hung
open, and his hat, turned up in front, cut a straight line across his forehead, just
over his half-open eyes. His cheekbones protruded, narrow and thin like the arms
of a cross, and the hollows under them had an ancient look as if the child’s
skeleton beneath were as old as the world. “Nobody going to bother you,” the
Negro muttered, pushing through the wall of honeysuckle without looking back.
“That going to be your trouble.”
Tarwater closed his eyes again.
Some night bird complaining close by woke him up. It was not a screeching
noise, only an intermittent hump-hump as if the bird had to recall his grievance
each time before he repeated it. Clouds were moving convulsively across a black
sky and there was a pink unsteady moon that appeared to be jerked up a foot or so
and then dropped and jerked up again. This was because, as he observed in an
instant, the sky was lowering, coming down fast to smother him. The bird
screeched and flew off in time and Tarwater lurched into the middle of the stream
bed and crouched on his hands and knees. The moon was reflected like pale fire in
the few spots of water in the sand. He sprang at the wall of honeysuckle and began
to tear through it, confusing the sweet familiar odor with the weight coming down
on him. When he stood up on the other side, the black ground swung slowly and
threw him down again. A flare of pink lightning lit the woods and he saw the
black shapes of trees pierce out of the ground all around him. The night bird began
to hump again froma thicket where he had settled.
Tarwater got up and started moving in the direction of the clearing, feeling his
way from tree to tree, the trunks very cold and dry to his touch. There was distant
thunder and a continuous flicker of pale lightning firing one section of woods and
then another. Finally he saw the shack, standing gaunt-black and tall in the middle
of the clearing, with the pink moon trembling directly over it. His eyes glittered
like open pits of light as he moved across the sand, dragging his crushed shadow
behind him. He didn’t turn his head to that side of the yard where he had started
the grave.
He stopped at the far back corner of the house and squatted down on the
ground and looked underneath at the litter there, chicken crates and barrels and old
rags and boxes. He had four matches in his pocket. He crawled under and began to
set small fires, building one from another and working his way out at the front
porch, leaving the fire behind him eating greedily at the dry tinder and the floor
boards of the house. He crossed the front side of the clearing and went under the
barbed-wire fence and through the rutted field without looking back until he
reached the edge of the opposite woods. Then he glanced over his shoulder and
saw that the pink moon had dropped through the roof of the shack and was bursting
and he began to run, forced on through the woods by two bulging silver eyes that
grew in immense astonishment in the center of the fire behind him.
Toward midnight he came out on the highway and caught a ride with a
salesman who was a manufacturer’s representative selling copper flues throughout
the Southeast and who gave the silent boy what he said was the best advice he
could give any young fellow setting out to find himself a place in the world. While
they sped forward on the black untwisting highway watched on either side by a
dark wall of trees, the salesman said that it had been his personal experience that
you couldn’t sell a copper flue to a man you didn’t love. He was a thin fellow
with a narrow gorgelike face that appeared to have been worn down to the
sharpest possible depressions. He wore a broad-brimmed stiff gray hat of the kind
used by business men who would like to look like cowboys. He said love was the
only policy that worked ninety-five per cent of the time. He said when he went to
sell a man a flue, he asked first about that man’s wife’s health and how his
children were. He said he had a book that he kept the names of his customer’s
families in and what was wrong with them. A man’s wife had cancer, he put her
name down in the book and wrote cancer after it and inquired about her every
time he went to that man’s hardware store until she died; then he scratched her
name out and wrote dead there “And I say thank God when they’re dead,” the
salesman said, “that’s one less to remember.”
“You don’t owe the dead anything,” Tarwater said in a loud voice, speaking
for almost the first time since he had got in the car.
“Nor they you,” said the stranger. “And that’s the way it ought to be in this
world—nobody owing nobody nothing.”
“Look,” Tarwater said suddenly, sitting forward, his face close to the
windshield, “we’re headed in the wrong direction. We’re going back where we
came from. There’s the fire again. There’s the fire we left.” Ahead of them in the
sky there was a faint glow, steady and not made by lightning. “That’s the same fire
we come from!” the boy said in a high wild voice.
“Boy, you must be nuts,” the salesman said. “That’s the city we’re coming to.
That’s the glow fromthe city lights. I reckon this is your first trip anywhere.”
You’re turned around,” the child said. “It’s the same fire.”
The stranger twisted his rutted face sharply. “I’ve never been turned around in
my life,” he said. “And I didn’t come from any fire. I come from Mobile. And I
know where I’mgoing. What’s the matter with you?”
Tarwater sat staring at the glow in front of him. “I was asleep,” he muttered.
“I’mjust now waking up.”
“Well you should have been listening to me,” the salesman said. “I been telling
you things you ought to know.”