Chapter 1
It was the first day warm enough to eat outdoors in the Bois de
Boulogne, while chestnut blossoms slanted down across the tables and
dropped impudently into the butter and the wine. Julia Ross ate a few
with her bread and listened to the big goldfish rippling in the pool and
the sparrows whirring about an abandoned table. You could see everybody
again—the waiters with their professional faces, the watchful
Frenchwomen all heels and eyes, Phil Hoffman opposite her with his
heart balanced on his fork, and the extraordinarily handsome man just
coming out on the terrace.
—the purple noon's transparent might.
The breath of the moist air is light
Around each unexpanded bud—
Julia trembled discreetly; she controlled herself; she didn't spring up
and call, "Yi-yi-yi-yi! Isn't this grand?" and push the maître d'hôtel into
the lily pond. She sat there, a well-behaved woman of twenty-one, and
discreetly trembled.
Phil was rising, napkin in hand. "Hi there, Dick!"
"Hi, Phil!"
It was the handsome man; Phil took a few steps forward and they
talked apart from the table.
"—seen Carter and Kitty in Spain—"
"—poured on to the Bremen—"
"—so I was going to—"
The man went on, following the head waiter, and Phil sat down.
"Who is that?" she demanded.
"A friend of mine—Dick Ragland."
"He's without doubt the handsomest man I ever saw in my life."
"Yes, he's handsome," he agreed without enthusiasm.
"Handsome! He's an archangel, he's a mountain lion, he's something to
eat. Just why didn't you introduce him?"
"Because he's got the worst reputation of any American in Paris."
"Nonsense; he must be maligned. It's all a dirty frame-up—a lot of jealous
husbands whose wives got one look at him. Why, that man's never
done anything in his life except lead cavalry charges and save children
from drowning."
"The fact remains he's not received anywhere—not for one reason but
for a thousand."
"What reasons?"
"Everything. Drink, women, jails, scandals, killed somebody with an
automobile, lazy, worthless—"
"I don't believe a word of it," said Julia firmly. "I bet he's tremendously
attractive. And you spoke to him as if you thought so too."
"Yes," he said reluctantly, "like so many alcholics, he has a certain
charm. If he'd only make his messes off by himself somewhere—except
right in people's laps. Just when somebody's taken him up and is making
a big fuss over him, he pours the soup down his hostess' back, kisses the
serving maid and passes out in the dog kennel. But he's done it too often.
He's run through about everybody, until there's no one left."
"There's me," said Julia.
There was Julia, who was a little too good for anybody and sometimes
regretted that she had been quite so well endowed. Anything added to
beauty has to be paid for—that is to say, the qualities that pass as substitutes
can be liabilities when added to beauty itself. Julia's brilliant hazel
glance was enough, without the questioning light of intelligence that
flickered in it; her irrepressible sense of the ridiculous detracted from the
gentle relief of her mouth, and the loveliness of her figure might have
been more obvious if she had slouched and postured rather than sat and
stood very straight, after the discipline of a strict father.
Equally perfect young men had several times appeared bearing gifts,
but generally with the air of being already complete, of having no space
for development. On the other hand, she found that men of larger scale
had sharp corners and edges in youth, and she was a little too young
herself to like that. There was, for instance, this scornful young egotist,
Phil Hoffman, opposite her, who was obviously going to be a brilliant
lawyer and who had practically followed her to Paris. She liked him as
well as anyone she knew, but he had at present all the overbearance of
the son of a chief of police.
"Tonight I'm going to London, and Wednesday I sail," he said. "And
you'll be in Europe all summer, with somebody new chewing on your
ear every few weeks."
"When you've been called for a lot of remarks like that you'll begin to
edge into the picture," Julia remarked. "Just to square yourself, I want
you to introduce that man Ragland."
"My last few hours!" he complained.
"But I've given you three whole days on the chance you'd work out a
better approach. Be a little civilized and ask him to have some coffee."
As Mr. Dick Ragland joined them, Julia drew a little breath of pleasure.
He was a fine figure of a man, in coloring both tan and blond, with a
peculiar luminosity to his face. His voice was quietly intense; it seemed
always to tremble a little with a sort of gay despair; the way he looked at
Julia made her feel attractive. For half an hour, as their sentences floated
pleasantly among the scent of violets and snowdrops, forget-me-nots
and pansies, her interest in him grew. She was even glad when Phil said:
"I've just thought about my English visa. I'll have to leave you two incipient
love birds together against my better judgment. Will you meet
me at the Gare St. Lazare at five and see me off?"
He looked at Julia hoping she'd say, "I'll go along with you now." She
knew very well she had no business being alone with this man, but he
made her laugh, and she hadn't laughed much lately, so she said: "I'll
stay a few minutes; it's so nice and springy here."
When Phil was gone, Dick Ragland suggested a fine champagne.
"I hear you have a terrible reputation?" she said impulsively.
"Awful. I'm not even invited out any more. Do you want me to slip on
my false mustache?"
"It's so odd," she pursued. "Don't you cut yourself off from all nourishment?
Do you know that Phil felt he had to warn me about you before he
introduced you? And I might very well have told him not to."
"Why didn't you?"
"I thought you seemed so attractive and it was such a pity."
His face grew bland; Julia saw that the remark had been made so often
that it no longer reached him.
"It's none of my business," she said quickly. She did not realize that his
being a sort of outcast added to his attraction for her—not the dissipation
itself, for never having seen it, it was merely an abstraction—but its result
in making him so alone. Something atavistic in her went out to the
stranger to the tribe, a being from a world with different habits from
hers, who promised the unexpected—promised adventure.
"I'll tell you something else," he said suddenly. "I'm going permanently
on the wagon on June fifth, my twenty-eighth birthday. I don't have fun
drinking any more. Evidently I'm not one of the few people who can use
liquor."
"You sure you can go on the wagon?"
"I always do what I say I'll do. Also I'm going back to New York and
go to work."
"I'm really surprised how glad I am." This was rash, but she let it
stand.
"Have another fine?" Dick suggested. "Then you'll be gladder still."
"Will you go on this way right up to your birthday?"
"Probably. On my birthday I'll be on the Olympic in mid-ocean."
"I'll be on that boat too!" she exclaimed.
"You can watch the quick change; I'll do it for the ship's concert."
The tables were being cleared off. Julia knew she should go now, but
she couldn't bear to leave him sitting with that unhappy look under his
smile. She felt, maternally, that she ought to say something to help him
keep his resolution.
"Tell me why you drink so much. Probably some obscure reason you
don't know yourself."
"Oh, I know pretty well how it began."
He told her as another hour waned. He had gone to the war at seventeen
and, when he came back, life as a Princeton freshman with a little
black cap was somewhat tame. So he went up to Boston Tech and then
abroad to the Beaux Arts; it was there that something happened to him.
"About the time I came into some money I found that with a few
drinks I got expansive and somehow had the ability to please people,
and the idea turned my head. Then I began to take a whole lot of drinks
to keep going and have everybody think I was wonderful. Well, I got
plastered a lot and quarreled with most of my friends, and then I met a
wild bunch and for a while I was expansive with them. But I was inclined
to get superior and suddenly think 'What am I doing with this
bunch?' They didn't like that much. And when a taxi that I was in killed
a man, I was sued. It was just a graft, but it got in the papers, and after I
was released the impression remained that I'd killed him. So all I've got
to show for the last five years is a reputation that makes mothers rush
their daughters away if I'm at the same hotel."
An impatient waiter was hovering near and she looked at her watch.
"Gosh, we're to see Phil off at five. We've been here all the afternoon."
As they hurried to the Gare St. Lazare, he asked: "Will you let me see
you again; or do you think you'd better not?"
She returned his long look. There was no sign of dissipation in his face,
in his warm cheeks, in his erect carriage.
"I'm always fine at lunch," he added, like an invalid.
"I'm not worried," she laughed. "Take me to lunch day after
tomorrow."
They hurried up the steps of the Gare St. Lazare, only to see the last
carriage of the Golden Arrow disappearing toward the Channel. Julia
was remorseful, because Phil had come so far.
As a sort of atonement, she went to the apartment where she lived
with her aunt and tried to write a letter to him, but Dick Ragland intruded
himself into her thoughts. By morning the effect of his good looks
had faded a little; she was inclined to write him a note that she couldn't
see him. Still, he had made her a simple appeal and she had brought it all
on herself. She waited for him at half-past twelve on the appointed day.
Julia had said nothing to her aunt, who had company for luncheon
and might mention his name—strange to go out with a man whose name
you couldn't mention. He was late and she waited in the hall, listening to
the echolalia of chatter from the luncheon party in the dining room. At
one she answered the bell.
There in the outer hall stood a man whom she thought she had never
seen before. His face was dead white and erratically shaven, his soft hat
was crushed bunlike on his head, his shirt collar was dirty, and all except
the band of his tie was out of sight. But at the moment when she recognized
the figure as Dick Ragland she perceived a change which dwarfed
the others into nothing; it was in his expression. His whole face was one
prolonged sneer—the lids held with difficulty from covering the fixed
eyes, the drooping mouth drawn up over the upper teeth, the chin wabbling
like a made-over chin in which the paraffin had run—it was a face
that both expressed and inspired disgust.
"H'lo," he muttered.
For a minute she drew back from him; then, at a sudden silence from
the dining room that gave on the hall, inspired by the silence in the hall
itself, she half pushed him over the threshold, stepped out herself and
closed the door behind them.
"Oh-h-h!" she said in a single, shocked breath.
"Haven't been home since yest'day. Got involve' on a party at—"
With repugnance, she turned him around by his arm and stumbled
with him down the apartment stairs, passing the concierge's wife, who
peered out at them curiously from her glass room. Then they came out
into the bright sunshine of the Rue Guynemer.
Against the spring freshness of the Luxembourg Gardens opposite, he
was even more grotesque. He frightened her; she looked desperately up
and down the street for a taxi, but one turning the corner of the Rue de
Vaugirard disregarded her signal.
"Where'll we go lunch?" he asked.
"You're in no shape to go to lunch. Don't you realize? You've got to go
home and sleep."
"I'm all right. I get a drink I'll be fine."
A passing cab slowed up at her gesture.
"You go home and go to sleep. You're not fit to go anywhere."
As he focused his eyes on her, realizing her suddenly as something
fresh, something new and lovely, something alien to the smoky and turbulent
world where he had spent his recent hours, a faint current of reason
flowed through him. She saw his mouth twist with vague awe, saw
him make a vague attempt to stand up straight. The taxi yawned.
"Maybe you're right. Very sorry."
"What's your address?"
He gave it and then tumbled into a corner, his face still struggling toward
reality. Julia closed the door.
When the cab had driven off, she hurried across the street and into the
Luxembourg Gardens as if someone were after her.
Chapter 2
Quite by accident, she answered when he telephoned at seven that night.
His voice was strained and shaking:
"I suppose there's not much use apologizing for this morning. I didn't
know what I was doing, but that's no excuse. But if you could let me see
you for a while somewhere tomorrow—just for a minute—I'd like the
chance of telling you in person how terribly sorry—"
"I'm busy tomorrow."
"Well, Friday then, or any day."
"I'm sorry, I'm very busy this week."
"You mean you don't ever want to see me again?"
"Mr. Ragland, I hardly see the use of going any further with this.
Really, that thing this morning was a little too much. I'm very sorry. I
hope you feel better. Good-by."
She put him entirely out of her mind. She had not even associated his
reputation with such a spectacle—a heavy drinker was someone who sat
up late and drank champagne and maybe in the small hours rode home
singing. This spectacle at high noon was something else again. Julia was
through.
Meanwhile there were other men with whom she lunched at Ciro's
and danced in the Bois. There was a reproachful letter from Phil Hoffman
in America. She liked Phil better for having been so right about this.
A fortnight passed and she would have forgotten Dick Ragland, had she
not heard his name mentioned with scorn in several conversations.
Evidently he had done such things before.
Then, a week before she was due to sail, she ran into him in the booking
department of the White Star Line. He was as handsome—she could
hardly believe her eyes. He leaned with an elbow on the desk, his fine
figure erect, his yellow gloves as stainless as his clear, shining eyes. His
strong, gay personality had affected the clerk who served him with fascinated
deference; the stenographers behind looked up for a minute and
exchanged a glance. Then he saw Julia; she nodded, and with a quick,
wincing change of expression he raised his hat.
They were together by the desk a long time and the silence was
oppressive.
"Isn't this a nuisance?" she said.
"Yes," he said jerkily, and then: "You going by the Olympic?"
"Oh, yes."
"I thought you might have changed."
"Of course not," she said coldly.
"I thought of changing; in fact, I was here to ask about it."
"That's absurd."
"You don't hate the sight of me? So it'll make you seasick when we
pass each other on the deck?"
She smiled. He seized his advantage:
"I've improved somewhat since we last met."
"Don't talk about that."
"Well then, you have improved. You've got the loveliest costume on I
ever saw."
This was presumptuous, but she felt herself shimmering a little at the
compliment.
"You wouldn't consider a cup of coffee with me at the café next door,
just to recover from this ordeal?"
How weak of her to talk to him like this, to let him make advances. It
was like being under the fascination of a snake.
"I'm afraid I can't." Something terribly timid and vulnerable came into
his face, twisting a little sinew in her heart. "Well, all right," she shocked
herself by saying.
Sitting at the sidewalk table in the sunlight, there was nothing to remind
her of that awful day two weeks ago. Jekyll and Hyde. He was
courteous, he was charming, he was amusing. He made her feel, oh, so
attractive! He presumed on nothing.
"Have you stopped drinking?" she asked.
"Not till the fifth."
"Oh!"
"Not until I said I'd stop. Then I'll stop."
When Julia rose to go, she shook her head at his suggestion of a further
meeting.
"I'll see you on the boat. After your twenty-eighth birthday."
"All right; one more thing: It fits in with the high price of crime that I
did something inexcusable to the one girl I've ever been in love with in
my life."
She saw him the first day on board, and then her heart sank into her
shoes as she realized at last how much she wanted him. No matter what
his past was, no matter what he had done. Which was not to say that she
would ever let him know, but only that he moved her chemically more
than anyone she had ever met, that all other men seemed pale beside
him.
He was popular on the boat; she heard that he was giving a party on
the night of his twenty-eighth birthday. Julia was not invited; when they
met they spoke pleasantly, nothing more.
It was the day after the fifth that she found him stretched in his deck
chair looking wan and white. There were wrinkles on his fine brow and
around his eyes, and his hand, as he reached out for a cup of bouillon,
was trembling. He was still there in the late afternoon, visibly suffering,
visibly miserable. After three times around, Julia was irresistibly impelled
to speak to him:
"Has the new era begun?"
He made a feeble effort to rise, but she motioned him not to and sat on
the next chair.
"You look tired."
"I'm just a little nervous. This is the first day in five years that I haven't
had a drink."
"It'll be better soon."
"I know," he said grimly.
"Don't weaken."
"I won't."
"Can't I help you in any way? Would you like a bromide?"
"I can't stand bromides," he said almost crossly. "No, thanks, I mean."
Julia stood up: "I know you feel better alone. Things will be brighter
tomorrow."
"Don't go, if you can stand me."
Julia sat down again.
"Sing me a song—can you sing?"
"What kind of a song?"
"Something sad—some sort of blues."
She sang him Libby Holman's "This is how the story ends," in a low,
soft voice.
"That's good. Now sing another. Or sing that again."
"All right. If you like, I'll sing to you all afternoon."
Chapter 3
The second day in New York he called her on the phone. "I've missed
you so," he said. "Have you missed me?"
"I'm afraid I have," she said reluctantly.
"Much?"
"I've missed you a lot. Are you better?"
"I'm all right now. I'm still just a little nervous, but I'm starting work
tomorrow. When can I see you?"
"When you want."
"This evening then. And look—say that again."
"What?"
"That you're afraid you have missed me."
"I'm afraid that I have," Julia said obediently.
"Missed me," he added.
"I'm afraid I have missed you."
"All right. It sounds like a song when you say it."
"Good-by, Dick."
"Good-by, Julia dear."
She stayed in New York two months instead of the fortnight she had
intended, because he would not let her go. Work took the place of drink
in the daytime, but afterward he must see Julia.
Sometimes she was jealous of his work when he telephoned that he
was too tired to go out after the theater. Lacking drink, night life was less
than nothing to him—something quite spoiled and well lost. For Julia,
who never drank, it was a stimulus in itself—the music and the parade
of dresses and the handsome couple they made dancing together. At first
they saw Phil Hoffman once in a while; Julia considered that he took the
matter rather badly; then they didn't see him any more.
A few unpleasant incidents occurred. An old schoolmate, Esther Cary,
came to her to ask if she knew of Dick Ragland's reputation. Instead of
growing angry, Julia invited her to meet Dick and was delighted with
the ease with which Esther's convictions were changed. There were other,
small, annoying episodes, but Dick's misdemeanors had, fortunately,
been confined to Paris and assumed here a far-away unreality. They
loved each other deeply now—the memory of that morning slowly being
effaced from Julia's imagination—but she wanted to be sure.
"After six months, if everything goes along like this, we'll announce
our engagement. After another six months we'll be married."
"Such a long time," he mourned.
"But there were five years before that," Julia answered. "I trust you
with my heart and with my mind, but something else says wait. Remember,
I'm also deciding for my children."
Those five years—oh, so lost and gone.
In August, Julia went to California for two months to see her family.
She wanted to know how Dick would get along alone. They wrote every
day; his letters were by turns cheerful, depressed, weary and hopeful.
His work was going better. As things came back to him, his uncle had
begun really to believe in him, but all the time he missed his Julia so. It
was when an occasional note of despair began to appear that she cut her
visit short by a week and came East to New York.
"Oh, thank God you're here!" he cried as they linked arms and walked
out of the Grand Central station. "It's been so hard. Half a dozen times
lately I've wanted to go on a bust and I had to think of you, and you
were so far away."
"Darling—darling, you're so tired and pale. You're working too hard."
"No, only that life is so bleak alone. When I go to bed my mind churns
on and on. Can't we get married sooner?"
"I don't know; we'll see. You've got your Julia near you now, and nothing
matters."
After a week, Dick's depression lifted. When he was sad, Julia made
him her baby, holding his handsome head against her breast, but she
liked it best when he was confident and could cheer her up, making her
laugh and feel taken care of and secure. She had rented an apartment
with another girl and she took courses in biology and domestic science in
Columbia. When deep fall came, they went to football games and the
new shows together, and walked through the first snow in Central Park,
and several times a week spent long evenings together in front of her
fire. But time was going by and they were both impatient. Just before
Christmas, an unfamiliar visitor—Phil Hoffman—presented himself at
her door. It was the first time in many months. New York, with its quality
of many independent ladders set side by side, is unkind to even the
meetings of close friends; so, in the case of strained relations, meetings
are easy to avoid.
And they were strange to each other. Since his expressed skepticism of
Dick, he was automatically her enemy; on another count, she saw that he
had improved, some of the hard angles were worn off; he was now an
assistant district attorney, moving around with increasing confidence
through his profession.
"So you're going to marry Dick?" he said. "When?"
"Soon now. When mother comes East."
He shook his head emphatically. "Julia, don't marry Dick. This isn't
jealousy—I know when I am licked—but it seems awful for a lovely girl
like you to take a blind dive into a lake full of rocks. What makes you
think that people change their courses? Sometimes they dry up or even
flow into a parallel channel, but I've never known anybody to change."
"Dick's changed."
"Maybe so. But isn't that an enormous 'maybe'? If he was unattractive
and you liked him, I'd say go ahead with it. Maybe I'm all wrong, but it's
so darn obvious that what fascinates you is that handsome pan of his
and those attractive manners."
"You don't know him," Julia answered loyally. "He's different with me.
You don't know how gentle he is, and responsive. Aren't you being
rather small and mean?"
"Hm." Phil thought for a moment. "I want to see you again in a few
days. Or perhaps I'll speak to Dick."
"You let Dick alone," she cried. "He has enough to worry him without
your nagging him. If you were his friend you'd try to help him instead of
coming to me behind his back."
"I'm your friend first."
"Dick and I are one person now."
But three days later Dick came to see her at an hour when he would
usually have been at the office.
"I'm here under compulsion," he said lightly, "under threat of exposure
by Phil Hoffman."
Her heart dropping like a plummet. "Has he given up?" she thought.
"Is he drinking again?"
"It's about a girl. You introduced me to her last summer and told me to
be very nice to her—Esther Cary."
Now her heart was beating slowly.
"After you went to California I was lonesome and I ran into her. She'd
liked me that day, and for a while we saw quite a bit of each other. Then
you came back and I broke it off. It was a little difficult; I hadn't realized
that she was so interested."
"I see." Her voice was starved and aghast.
"Try and understand. Those terribly lonely evenings. I think if it hadn't
been for Esther, I'd have fallen off the wagon. I never loved her—I never
loved anybody but you—but I had to see somebody who liked me."
He put his arm around her, but she felt cold all over and he drew
away.
"Then any woman would have done," Julia said slowly. "It didn't matter
who."
"No!" he cried.
"I stayed away so long to let you stand on your own feet and get back
your self-respect by yourself."
"I only love you, Julia."
"But any woman can help you. So you don't really need me, do you?"
His face wore that vulnerable look that Julia had seen several times before;
she sat on the arm of his chair and ran her hand over his cheek.
"Then what do you bring me?" she demanded. "I thought that there'd
be the accumulated strength of having beaten your weakness. What do
you bring me now?"
"Everything I have."
She shook her head. "Nothing. Just your good looks—and the head
waiter at dinner last night had that."
They talked for two days and decided nothing. Sometimes she would
pull him close and reach up to his lips that she loved so well, but her
arms seemed to close around straw.
"I'll go away and give you a chance to think it over," he said despairingly.
"I can't see any way of living without you, but I suppose you can't
marry a man you don't trust or believe in. My uncle wanted me to go to
London on some business—"
The night he left, it was sad on the dim pier. All that kept her from
breaking was that it was not an image of strength that was leaving her;
she would be just as strong without him. Yet as the murky lights fell on
the fine structure of his brow and chin, as she saw the faces turn toward
him, the eyes that followed him, an awful emptiness seized her and she
wanted to say: "Never mind, dear; we'll try it together."
But try what? It was human to risk the toss between failure and success,
but to risk the desperate gamble between adequacy and disaster—
"Oh, Dick, be good and be strong and come back to me. Change,
change, Dick—change!"
"Good-by, Julia—good-by."
She last saw him on the deck, his profile cut sharp as a cameo against a
match as he lit a cigarette.
Chapter 4
It was Phil Hoffman who was to be with her at the beginning and the
end. It was he who broke the news as gently as it could be broken. He
reached her apartment at half-past eight and carefully threw away the
morning paper outside. Dick Ragland had disappeared at sea.
After her first wild burst of grief, he became purposely a little cruel.
"He knew himself. His will had given out; he didn't want life any
more. And, Julia, just to show you how little you can possibly blame
yourself, I'll tell you this: He'd hardly gone to his office for four
months—since you went to California. He wasn't fired because of his
uncle; the business he went to London on was of no importance at all.
After his first enthusiasm was gone he'd given up."
She looked at him sharply. "He didn't drink, did he? He wasn't
drinking?"
For a fraction of a second Phil hesitated. "No, he didn't drink; he kept
his promise—he held on to that."
"That was it," she said. "He kept his promise and he killed himself doing
it."
Phil waited uncomfortably.
"He did what he said he would and broke his heart doing it," she went
on chokingly. "Oh, isn't life cruel sometimes—so cruel, never to let anybody
off. He was so brave—he died doing what he said he'd do."
Phil was glad he had thrown away the newspaper that hinted of Dick's
gay evening in the bar—one of many gay evenings that Phil had known
of in the past few months. He was relieved that was over, because Dick's
weakness had threatened the happiness of the girl he loved; but he was
terribly sorry for him—even understanding how it was necessary for
him to turn his maladjustment to life toward one mischief or another—but
he was wise enough to leave Julia with the dream that she had
saved out of wreckage.
There was a bad moment a year later, just before their marriage, when
she said:
"You'll understand the feeling I have and always will have about Dick,
won't you, Phil? It wasn't just his good looks. I believed in him—and I
was right in a way. He broke rather than bent; he was a ruined man, but
not a bad man. In my heart I knew when I first looked at him."
Phil winced, but he said nothing. Perhaps there was more behind it
than they knew. Better let it all alone in the depths of her heart and the
depths of the sea.